                   1
From fairest creatures we desire increase,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
But as the riper should by time decease,
His tender heir might bear his memory:
But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel,
Making a famine where abundance lies,
Thy self thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel:
Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament,
And only herald to the gaudy spring,
Within thine own bud buriest thy content,
And tender churl mak'st waste in niggarding:
  Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
  To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.


                   2
When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
Thy youth's proud livery so gazed on now,
Will be a tattered weed of small worth held:
Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies,
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days;
To say within thine own deep sunken eyes,
Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise.
How much more praise deserved thy beauty's use,
If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine
Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse'
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
  This were to be new made when thou art old,
  And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.


                   3
Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest,
Now is the time that face should form another,
Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
For where is she so fair whose uneared womb
Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb,
Of his self-love to stop posterity?
Thou art thy mother's glass and she in thee
Calls back the lovely April of her prime,
So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
  But if thou live remembered not to be,
  Die single and thine image dies with thee.


                   4
Unthrifty loveliness why dost thou spend,
Upon thy self thy beauty's legacy?
Nature's bequest gives nothing but doth lend,
And being frank she lends to those are free:
Then beauteous niggard why dost thou abuse,
The bounteous largess given thee to give?
Profitless usurer why dost thou use
So great a sum of sums yet canst not live?
For having traffic with thy self alone,
Thou of thy self thy sweet self dost deceive,
Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
  Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
  Which used lives th' executor to be.


                   5
Those hours that with gentle work did frame
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell
Will play the tyrants to the very same,
And that unfair which fairly doth excel:
For never-resting time leads summer on
To hideous winter and confounds him there,
Sap checked with frost and lusty leaves quite gone,
Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness every where:
Then were not summer's distillation left
A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft,
Nor it nor no remembrance what it was.
  But flowers distilled though they with winter meet,
  Leese but their show, their substance still lives sweet.


                   6
Then let not winter's ragged hand deface,
In thee thy summer ere thou be distilled:
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place,
With beauty's treasure ere it be self-killed:
That use is not forbidden usury,
Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
That's for thy self to breed another thee,
Or ten times happier be it ten for one,
Ten times thy self were happier than thou art,
If ten of thine ten times refigured thee:
Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
Leaving thee living in posterity?
  Be not self-willed for thou art much too fair,
  To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.


                   7
Lo in the orient when the gracious light
Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
Serving with looks his sacred majesty,
And having climbed the steep-up heavenly hill,
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
Attending on his golden pilgrimage:
But when from highmost pitch with weary car,
Like feeble age he reeleth from the day,
The eyes (fore duteous) now converted are
From his low tract and look another way:
  So thou, thy self out-going in thy noon:
  Unlooked on diest unless thou get a son.


                   8
Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy:
Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly,
Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy?
If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
By unions married do offend thine ear,
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear:
Mark how one string sweet husband to another,
Strikes each in each by mutual ordering;
Resembling sire, and child, and happy mother,
Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
  Whose speechless song being many, seeming one,
  Sings this to thee, 'Thou single wilt prove none'.


                   9
Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye,
That thou consum'st thy self in single life?
Ah, if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
The world will wail thee like a makeless wife,
The world will be thy widow and still weep,
That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
When every private widow well may keep,
By children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind:
Look what an unthrift in the world doth spend
Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
But beauty's waste hath in the world an end,
And kept unused the user so destroys it:
  No love toward others in that bosom sits
  That on himself such murd'rous shame commits.


                   10
For shame deny that thou bear'st love to any
Who for thy self art so unprovident.
Grant if thou wilt, thou art beloved of many,
But that thou none lov'st is most evident:
For thou art so possessed with murd'rous hate,
That 'gainst thy self thou stick'st not to conspire,
Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
Which to repair should be thy chief desire:
O change thy thought, that I may change my mind,
Shall hate be fairer lodged than gentle love?
Be as thy presence is gracious and kind,
Or to thy self at least kind-hearted prove,
  Make thee another self for love of me,
  That beauty still may live in thine or thee.


                   11
As fast as thou shalt wane so fast thou grow'st,
In one of thine, from that which thou departest,
And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st,
Thou mayst call thine, when thou from youth convertest,
Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase,
Without this folly, age, and cold decay,
If all were minded so, the times should cease,
And threescore year would make the world away:
Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish:
Look whom she best endowed, she gave thee more;
Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
  She carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby,
  Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.


                   12
When I do count the clock that tells the time,
And see the brave day sunk in hideous night,
When I behold the violet past prime,
And sable curls all silvered o'er with white:
When lofty trees I see barren of leaves,
Which erst from heat did canopy the herd
And summer's green all girded up in sheaves
Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard:
Then of thy beauty do I question make
That thou among the wastes of time must go,
Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake,
And die as fast as they see others grow,
  And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence
  Save breed to brave him, when he takes thee hence.


                   13
O that you were your self, but love you are
No longer yours, than you your self here live,
Against this coming end you should prepare,
And your sweet semblance to some other give.
So should that beauty which you hold in lease
Find no determination, then you were
Your self again after your self's decease,
When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
Which husbandry in honour might uphold,
Against the stormy gusts of winter's day
And barren rage of death's eternal cold?
  O none but unthrifts, dear my love you know,
  You had a father, let your son say so.


                   14
Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck,
And yet methinks I have astronomy,
But not to tell of good, or evil luck,
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality,
Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell;
Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
Or say with princes if it shall go well
By oft predict that I in heaven find.
But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
And constant stars in them I read such art
As truth and beauty shall together thrive
If from thy self, to store thou wouldst convert:
  Or else of thee this I prognosticate,
  Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.


                   15
When I consider every thing that grows
Holds in perfection but a little moment.
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
Whereon the stars in secret influence comment.
When I perceive that men as plants increase,
Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky:
Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
And wear their brave state out of memory.
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay,
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
Where wasteful time debateth with decay
To change your day of youth to sullied night,
  And all in war with Time for love of you,
  As he takes from you, I engraft you new.


                   16
But wherefore do not you a mightier way
Make war upon this bloody tyrant Time?
And fortify your self in your decay
With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
And many maiden gardens yet unset,
With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers,
Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
So should the lines of life that life repair
Which this (Time's pencil) or my pupil pen
Neither in inward worth nor outward fair
Can make you live your self in eyes of men.
  To give away your self, keeps your self still,
  And you must live drawn by your own sweet skill.


                   17
Who will believe my verse in time to come
If it were filled with your most high deserts?
Though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb
Which hides your life, and shows not half your parts:
If I could write the beauty of your eyes,
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
The age to come would say this poet lies,
Such heavenly touches ne'er touched earthly faces.
So should my papers (yellowed with their age)
Be scorned, like old men of less truth than tongue,
And your true rights be termed a poet's rage,
And stretched metre of an antique song.
  But were some child of yours alive that time,
  You should live twice in it, and in my rhyme.


                   18
Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimmed,
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance, or nature's changing course untrimmed:
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
Nor shall death brag thou wand'rest in his shade,
When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st,
  So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
  So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.


                   19
Devouring Time blunt thou the lion's paws,
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood,
Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
And burn the long-lived phoenix, in her blood,
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleet'st,
And do whate'er thou wilt swift-footed Time
To the wide world and all her fading sweets:
But I forbid thee one most heinous crime,
O carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,
Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen,
Him in thy course untainted do allow,
For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
  Yet do thy worst old Time: despite thy wrong,
  My love shall in my verse ever live young.


                   20
A woman's face with nature's own hand painted,
Hast thou the master mistress of my passion,
A woman's gentle heart but not acquainted
With shifting change as is false women's fashion,
An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling:
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth,
A man in hue all hues in his controlling,
Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth.
And for a woman wert thou first created,
Till nature as she wrought thee fell a-doting,
And by addition me of thee defeated,
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
  But since she pricked thee out for women's pleasure,
  Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.


                   21
So is it not with me as with that muse,
Stirred by a painted beauty to his verse,
Who heaven it self for ornament doth use,
And every fair with his fair doth rehearse,
Making a couplement of proud compare
With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems:
With April's first-born flowers and all things rare,
That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.
O let me true in love but truly write,
And then believe me, my love is as fair,
As any mother's child, though not so bright
As those gold candles fixed in heaven's air:
  Let them say more that like of hearsay well,
  I will not praise that purpose not to sell.


                   22
My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
So long as youth and thou are of one date,
But when in thee time's furrows I behold,
Then look I death my days should expiate.
For all that beauty that doth cover thee,
Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me,
How can I then be elder than thou art?
O therefore love be of thyself so wary,
As I not for my self, but for thee will,
Bearing thy heart which I will keep so chary
As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
  Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain,
  Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again.


                   23
As an unperfect actor on the stage,
Who with his fear is put beside his part,
Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart;
So I for fear of trust, forget to say,
The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
And in mine own love's strength seem to decay,
O'ercharged with burthen of mine own love's might:
O let my looks be then the eloquence,
And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
Who plead for love, and look for recompense,
More than that tongue that more hath more expressed.
  O learn to read what silent love hath writ,
  To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.


                   24
Mine eye hath played the painter and hath stelled,
Thy beauty's form in table of my heart,
My body is the frame wherein 'tis held,
And perspective it is best painter's art.
For through the painter must you see his skill,
To find where your true image pictured lies,
Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still,
That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes:
Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done,
Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun
Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;
  Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art,
  They draw but what they see, know not the heart.


                   25
Let those who are in favour with their stars,
Of public honour and proud titles boast,
Whilst I whom fortune of such triumph bars
Unlooked for joy in that I honour most;
Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread,
But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
And in themselves their pride lies buried,
For at a frown they in their glory die.
The painful warrior famoused for fight,
After a thousand victories once foiled,
Is from the book of honour razed quite,
And all the rest forgot for which he toiled:
  Then happy I that love and am beloved
  Where I may not remove nor be removed.


                   26
Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit;
To thee I send this written embassage
To witness duty, not to show my wit.
Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it;
But that I hope some good conceit of thine
In thy soul's thought (all naked) will bestow it:
Till whatsoever star that guides my moving,
Points on me graciously with fair aspect,
And puts apparel on my tattered loving,
To show me worthy of thy sweet respect,
  Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee,
  Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.


                   27
Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
The dear respose for limbs with travel tired,
But then begins a journey in my head
To work my mind, when body's work's expired.
For then my thoughts (from far where I abide)
Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
Looking on darkness which the blind do see.
Save that my soul's imaginary sight
Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,
Which like a jewel (hung in ghastly night)
Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new.
  Lo thus by day my limbs, by night my mind,
  For thee, and for my self, no quiet find.


                   28
How can I then return in happy plight
That am debarred the benefit of rest?
When day's oppression is not eased by night,
But day by night and night by day oppressed.
And each (though enemies to either's reign)
Do in consent shake hands to torture me,
The one by toil, the other to complain
How far I toil, still farther off from thee.
I tell the day to please him thou art bright,
And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven:
So flatter I the swart-complexioned night,
When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even.
  But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
  And night doth nightly make grief's length seem stronger


                   29
When in disgrace with Fortune and men's eyes,
I all alone beweep my outcast state,
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
And look upon my self and curse my fate,
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
Featured like him, like him with friends possessed,
Desiring this man's art, and that man's scope,
With what I most enjoy contented least,
Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
Haply I think on thee, and then my state,
(Like to the lark at break of day arising
From sullen earth) sings hymns at heaven's gate,
  For thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings,
  That then I scorn to change my state with kings.


                   30
When to the sessions of sweet silent thought,
I summon up remembrance of things past,
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste:
Then can I drown an eye (unused to flow)
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
And weep afresh love's long since cancelled woe,
And moan th' expense of many a vanished sight.
Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,
Which I new pay as if not paid before.
  But if the while I think on thee (dear friend)
  All losses are restored, and sorrows end.


                   31
Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,
Which I by lacking have supposed dead,
And there reigns love and all love's loving parts,
And all those friends which I thought buried.
How many a holy and obsequious tear
Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye,
As interest of the dead, which now appear,
But things removed that hidden in thee lie.
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
Who all their parts of me to thee did give,
That due of many, now is thine alone.
  Their images I loved, I view in thee,
  And thou (all they) hast all the all of me.


                   32
If thou survive my well-contented day,
When that churl death my bones with dust shall cover
And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover:
Compare them with the bett'ring of the time,
And though they be outstripped by every pen,
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
Exceeded by the height of happier men.
O then vouchsafe me but this loving thought,
'Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age,
A dearer birth than this his love had brought
To march in ranks of better equipage:
  But since he died and poets better prove,
  Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love'.


                   33
Full many a glorious morning have I seen,
Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye,
Kissing with golden face the meadows green;
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy:
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride,
With ugly rack on his celestial face,
And from the forlorn world his visage hide
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace:
Even so my sun one early morn did shine,
With all triumphant splendour on my brow,
But out alack, he was but one hour mine,
The region cloud hath masked him from me now.
  Yet him for this, my love no whit disdaineth,
  Suns of the world may stain, when heaven's sun staineth.


                   34
Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way,
Hiding thy brav'ry in their rotten smoke?
'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
For no man well of such a salve can speak,
That heals the wound, and cures not the disgrace:
Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief,
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss,
Th' offender's sorrow lends but weak relief
To him that bears the strong offence's cross.
  Ah but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
  And they are rich, and ransom all ill deeds.


                   35
No more be grieved at that which thou hast done,
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud,
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
All men make faults, and even I in this,
Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
My self corrupting salving thy amiss,
Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are:
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense,
Thy adverse party is thy advocate,
And 'gainst my self a lawful plea commence:
Such civil war is in my love and hate,
  That I an accessary needs must be,
  To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.


                   36
Let me confess that we two must be twain,
Although our undivided loves are one:
So shall those blots that do with me remain,
Without thy help, by me be borne alone.
In our two loves there is but one respect,
Though in our lives a separable spite,
Which though it alter not love's sole effect,
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.
I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
Unless thou take that honour from thy name:
  But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
  As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.


                   37
As a decrepit father takes delight,
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
So I, made lame by Fortune's dearest spite
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
Or any of these all, or all, or more
Entitled in thy parts, do crowned sit,
I make my love engrafted to this store:
So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised,
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give,
That I in thy abundance am sufficed,
And by a part of all thy glory live:
  Look what is best, that best I wish in thee,
  This wish I have, then ten times happy me.


                   38
How can my muse want subject to invent
While thou dost breathe that pour'st into my verse,
Thine own sweet argument, too excellent,
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
O give thy self the thanks if aught in me,
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight,
For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee,
When thou thy self dost give invention light?
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
Than those old nine which rhymers invocate,
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
  If my slight muse do please these curious days,
  The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.


                   39
O how thy worth with manners may I sing,
When thou art all the better part of me?
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring:
And what is't but mine own when I praise thee?
Even for this, let us divided live,
And our dear love lose name of single one,
That by this separation I may give:
That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone:
O absence what a torment wouldst thou prove,
Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave,
To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive.
  And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
  By praising him here who doth hence remain.


                   40
Take all my loves, my love, yea take them all,
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call,
All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more:
Then if for my love, thou my love receivest,
I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest,
But yet be blamed, if thou thy self deceivest
By wilful taste of what thy self refusest.
I do forgive thy robbery gentle thief
Although thou steal thee all my poverty:
And yet love knows it is a greater grief
To bear greater wrong, than hate's known injury.
  Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
  Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes.


                   41
Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
Thy beauty, and thy years full well befits,
For still temptation follows where thou art.
Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won,
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed.
And when a woman woos, what woman's son,
Will sourly leave her till he have prevailed?
Ay me, but yet thou mightst my seat forbear,
And chide thy beauty, and thy straying youth,
Who lead thee in their riot even there
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth:
  Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
  Thine by thy beauty being false to me.


                   42
That thou hast her it is not all my grief,
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly,
That she hath thee is of my wailing chief,
A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
Loving offenders thus I will excuse ye,
Thou dost love her, because thou know'st I love her,
And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,
Suff'ring my friend for my sake to approve her.
If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain,
And losing her, my friend hath found that loss,
Both find each other, and I lose both twain,
And both for my sake lay on me this cross,
  But here's the joy, my friend and I are one,
  Sweet flattery, then she loves but me alone.


                   43
When most I wink then do mine eyes best see,
For all the day they view things unrespected,
But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,
And darkly bright, are bright in dark directed.
Then thou whose shadow shadows doth make bright
How would thy shadow's form, form happy show,
To the clear day with thy much clearer light,
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!
How would (I say) mine eyes be blessed made,
By looking on thee in the living day,
When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade,
Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
  All days are nights to see till I see thee,
  And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.


                   44
If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
Injurious distance should not stop my way,
For then despite of space I would be brought,
From limits far remote, where thou dost stay,
No matter then although my foot did stand
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee,
For nimble thought can jump both sea and land,
As soon as think the place where he would be.
But ah, thought kills me that I am not thought
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
But that so much of earth and water wrought,
I must attend, time's leisure with my moan.
  Receiving nought by elements so slow,
  But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.


                   45
The other two, slight air, and purging fire,
Are both with thee, wherever I abide,
The first my thought, the other my desire,
These present-absent with swift motion slide.
For when these quicker elements are gone
In tender embassy of love to thee,
My life being made of four, with two alone,
Sinks down to death, oppressed with melancholy.
Until life's composition be recured,
By those swift messengers returned from thee,
Who even but now come back again assured,
Of thy fair health, recounting it to me.
  This told, I joy, but then no longer glad,
  I send them back again and straight grow sad.


                   46
Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war,
How to divide the conquest of thy sight,
Mine eye, my heart thy picture's sight would bar,
My heart, mine eye the freedom of that right,
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie,
(A closet never pierced with crystal eyes)
But the defendant doth that plea deny,
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
To side this title is impanelled
A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart,
And by their verdict is determined
The clear eye's moiety, and the dear heart's part.
  As thus, mine eye's due is thy outward part,
  And my heart's right, thy inward love of heart.


                   47
Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,
And each doth good turns now unto the other,
When that mine eye is famished for a look,
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother;
With my love's picture then my eye doth feast,
And to the painted banquet bids my heart:
Another time mine eye is my heart's guest,
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part.
So either by thy picture or my love,
Thy self away, art present still with me,
For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,
And I am still with them, and they with thee.
  Or if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
  Awakes my heart, to heart's and eye's delight.


                   48
How careful was I when I took my way,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
That to my use it might unused stay
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!
But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief,
Thou best of dearest, and mine only care,
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
Thee have I not locked up in any chest,
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
Within the gentle closure of my breast,
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part,
  And even thence thou wilt be stol'n I fear,
  For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.


                   49
Against that time (if ever that time come)
When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,
Called to that audit by advised respects,
Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass,
And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye,
When love converted from the thing it was
Shall reasons find of settled gravity;
Against that time do I ensconce me here
Within the knowledge of mine own desert,
And this my hand, against my self uprear,
To guard the lawful reasons on thy part,
  To leave poor me, thou hast the strength of laws,
  Since why to love, I can allege no cause.


                   50
How heavy do I journey on the way,
When what I seek (my weary travel's end)
Doth teach that case and that repose to say
'Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend.'
The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
As if by some instinct the wretch did know
His rider loved not speed being made from thee:
The bloody spur cannot provoke him on,
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide,
Which heavily he answers with a groan,
More sharp to me than spurring to his side,
  For that same groan doth put this in my mind,
  My grief lies onward and my joy behind.


                   51
Thus can my love excuse the slow offence,
Of my dull bearer, when from thee I speed,
From where thou art, why should I haste me thence?
Till I return of posting is no need.
O what excuse will my poor beast then find,
When swift extremity can seem but slow?
Then should I spur though mounted on the wind,
In winged speed no motion shall I know,
Then can no horse with my desire keep pace,
Therefore desire (of perfect'st love being made)
Shall neigh (no dull flesh) in his fiery race,
But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade,
  Since from thee going, he went wilful-slow,
  Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.


                   52
So am I as the rich whose blessed key,
Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,
The which he will not every hour survey,
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.
Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
Since seldom coming in that long year set,
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
So is the time that keeps you as my chest
Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,
To make some special instant special-blest,
By new unfolding his imprisoned pride.
  Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope,
  Being had to triumph, being lacked to hope.


                   53
What is your substance, whereof are you made,
That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
Since every one, hath every one, one shade,
And you but one, can every shadow lend:
Describe Adonis and the counterfeit,
Is poorly imitated after you,
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,
And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
Speak of the spring, and foison of the year,
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
The other as your bounty doth appear,
And you in every blessed shape we know.
  In all external grace you have some part,
  But you like none, none you for constant heart.


                   54
O how much more doth beauty beauteous seem,
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
For that sweet odour, which doth in it live:
The canker blooms have full as deep a dye,
As the perfumed tincture of the roses,
Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly,
When summer's breath their masked buds discloses:
But for their virtue only is their show,
They live unwooed, and unrespected fade,
Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so,
Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odours made:
  And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
  When that shall fade, my verse distills your truth.


                   55
Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme,
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
Than unswept stone, besmeared with sluttish time.
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
And broils root out the work of masonry,
Nor Mars his sword, nor war's quick fire shall burn:
The living record of your memory.
'Gainst death, and all-oblivious enmity
Shall you pace forth, your praise shall still find room,
Even in the eyes of all posterity
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
  So till the judgment that your self arise,
  You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes.


                   56
Sweet love renew thy force, be it not said
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
Which but to-day by feeding is allayed,
To-morrow sharpened in his former might.
So love be thou, although to-day thou fill
Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness,
To-morrow see again, and do not kill
The spirit of love, with a perpetual dulness:
Let this sad interim like the ocean be
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new,
Come daily to the banks, that when they see:
Return of love, more blest may be the view.
  Or call it winter, which being full of care,
  Makes summer's welcome, thrice more wished, more rare.


                   57
Being your slave what should I do but tend,
Upon the hours, and times of your desire?
I have no precious time at all to spend;
Nor services to do till you require.
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour,
Whilst I (my sovereign) watch the clock for you,
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
When you have bid your servant once adieu.
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought,
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
But like a sad slave stay and think of nought
Save where you are, how happy you make those.
  So true a fool is love, that in your will,
  (Though you do any thing) he thinks no ill.


                   58
That god forbid, that made me first your slave,
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
Or at your hand th' account of hours to crave,
Being your vassal bound to stay your leisure.
O let me suffer (being at your beck)
Th' imprisoned absence of your liberty,
And patience tame to sufferance bide each check,
Without accusing you of injury.
Be where you list, your charter is so strong,
That you your self may privilage your time
To what you will, to you it doth belong,
Your self to pardon of self-doing crime.
  I am to wait, though waiting so be hell,
  Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well.


                   59
If there be nothing new, but that which is,
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,
Which labouring for invention bear amis
The second burthen of a former child!
O that record could with a backward look,
Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
Show me your image in some antique book,
Since mind at first in character was done.
That I might see what the old world could say,
To this composed wonder of your frame,
Whether we are mended, or whether better they,
Or whether revolution be the same.
  O sure I am the wits of former days,
  To subjects worse have given admiring praise.


                   60
Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,
So do our minutes hasten to their end,
Each changing place with that which goes before,
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
Nativity once in the main of light,
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crowned,
Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight,
And Time that gave, doth now his gift confound.
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth,
And delves the parallels in beauty's brow,
Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow.
  And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand
  Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.


                   61
Is it thy will, thy image should keep open
My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee
So far from home into my deeds to pry,
To find out shames and idle hours in me,
The scope and tenure of thy jealousy?
O no, thy love though much, is not so great,
It is my love that keeps mine eye awake,
Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,
To play the watchman ever for thy sake.
  For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
  From me far off, with others all too near.


                   62
Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye,
And all my soul, and all my every part;
And for this sin there is no remedy,
It is so grounded inward in my heart.
Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
No shape so true, no truth of such account,
And for my self mine own worth do define,
As I all other in all worths surmount.
But when my glass shows me my self indeed
beated and chopt with tanned antiquity,
Mine own self-love quite contrary I read:
Self, so self-loving were iniquity.
  'Tis thee (my self) that for my self I praise,
  Painting my age with beauty of thy days.


                   63
Against my love shall be as I am now
With Time's injurious hand crushed and o'erworn,
When hours have drained his blood and filled his brow
With lines and wrinkles, when his youthful morn
Hath travelled on to age's steepy night,
And all those beauties whereof now he's king
Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight,
Stealing away the treasure of his spring:
For such a time do I now fortify
Against confounding age's cruel knife,
That he shall never cut from memory
My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life.
  His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
  And they shall live, and he in them still green.


                   64
When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced
The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age,
When sometime lofty towers I see down-rased,
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage.
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
And the firm soil win of the watery main,
Increasing store with loss, and loss with store.
When I have seen such interchange of State,
Or state it self confounded, to decay,
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate
That Time will come and take my love away.
  This thought is as a death which cannot choose
  But weep to have, that which it fears to lose.


                   65
Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
But sad mortality o'ersways their power,
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
O how shall summer's honey breath hold out,
Against the wrackful siege of batt'ring days,
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays?
O fearful meditation, where alack,
Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid?
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back,
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
  O none, unless this miracle have might,
  That in black ink my love may still shine bright.


                   66
Tired with all these for restful death I cry,
As to behold desert a beggar born,
And needy nothing trimmed in jollity,
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
And gilded honour shamefully misplaced,
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,
And strength by limping sway disabled
And art made tongue-tied by authority,
And folly (doctor-like) controlling skill,
And simple truth miscalled simplicity,
And captive good attending captain ill.
  Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,
  Save that to die, I leave my love alone.


                   67
Ah wherefore with infection should he live,
And with his presence grace impiety,
That sin by him advantage should achieve,
And lace it self with his society?
Why should false painting imitate his cheek,
And steal dead seeming of his living hue?
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek,
Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
Why should he live, now nature bankrupt is,
Beggared of blood to blush through lively veins,
For she hath no exchequer now but his,
And proud of many, lives upon his gains?
  O him she stores, to show what wealth she had,
  In days long since, before these last so bad.


                   68
Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,
When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
Before these bastard signs of fair were born,
Or durst inhabit on a living brow:
Before the golden tresses of the dead,
The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,
To live a second life on second head,
Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay:
In him those holy antique hours are seen,
Without all ornament, it self and true,
Making no summer of another's green,
Robbing no old to dress his beauty new,
  And him as for a map doth Nature store,
  To show false Art what beauty was of yore.


                   69
Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view,
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend:
All tongues (the voice of souls) give thee that due,
Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.
Thy outward thus with outward praise is crowned,
But those same tongues that give thee so thine own,
In other accents do this praise confound
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
They look into the beauty of thy mind,
And that in guess they measure by thy deeds,
Then churls their thoughts (although their eyes were kind)
To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds:
  But why thy odour matcheth not thy show,
  The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.


                   70
That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect,
For slander's mark was ever yet the fair,
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.
So thou be good, slander doth but approve,
Thy worth the greater being wooed of time,
For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.
Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days,
Either not assailed, or victor being charged,
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
To tie up envy, evermore enlarged,
  If some suspect of ill masked not thy show,
  Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.


                   71
No longer mourn for me when I am dead,
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
Give warning to the world that I am fled
From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell:
Nay if you read this line, remember not,
The hand that writ it, for I love you so,
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot,
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
O if (I say) you look upon this verse,
When I (perhaps) compounded am with clay,
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse;
But let your love even with my life decay.
  Lest the wise world should look into your moan,
  And mock you with me after I am gone.


                   72
O lest the world should task you to recite,
What merit lived in me that you should love
After my death (dear love) forget me quite,
For you in me can nothing worthy prove.
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
To do more for me than mine own desert,
And hang more praise upon deceased I,
Than niggard truth would willingly impart:
O lest your true love may seem false in this,
That you for love speak well of me untrue,
My name be buried where my body is,
And live no more to shame nor me, nor you.
  For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
  And so should you, to love things nothing worth.


                   73
That time of year thou mayst in me behold,
When yellow leaves, or none, or few do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Bare ruined choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
In me thou seest the twilight of such day,
As after sunset fadeth in the west,
Which by and by black night doth take away,
Death's second self that seals up all in rest.
In me thou seest the glowing of such fire,
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
As the death-bed, whereon it must expire,
Consumed with that which it was nourished by.
  This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
  To love that well, which thou must leave ere long.


                   74
But be contented when that fell arrest,
Without all bail shall carry me away,
My life hath in this line some interest,
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
When thou reviewest this, thou dost review,
The very part was consecrate to thee,
The earth can have but earth, which is his due,
My spirit is thine the better part of me,
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
The prey of worms, my body being dead,
The coward conquest of a wretch's knife,
Too base of thee to be remembered,
  The worth of that, is that which it contains,
  And that is this, and this with thee remains.


                   75
So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
Or as sweet-seasoned showers are to the ground;
And for the peace of you I hold such strife
As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found.
Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure,
Now counting best to be with you alone,
Then bettered that the world may see my pleasure,
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
And by and by clean starved for a look,
Possessing or pursuing no delight
Save what is had, or must from you be took.
  Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
  Or gluttoning on all, or all away.


                   76
Why is my verse so barren of new pride?
So far from variation or quick change?
Why with the time do I not glance aside
To new-found methods, and to compounds strange?
Why write I still all one, ever the same,
And keep invention in a noted weed,
That every word doth almost tell my name,
Showing their birth, and where they did proceed?
O know sweet love I always write of you,
And you and love are still my argument:
So all my best is dressing old words new,
Spending again what is already spent:
  For as the sun is daily new and old,
  So is my love still telling what is told.


                   77
Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste,
These vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear,
And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste.
The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show,
Of mouthed graves will give thee memory,
Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know,
Time's thievish progress to eternity.
Look what thy memory cannot contain,
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
Those children nursed, delivered from thy brain,
To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
  These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
  Shall profit thee, and much enrich thy book.


                   78
So oft have I invoked thee for my muse,
And found such fair assistance in my verse,
As every alien pen hath got my use,
And under thee their poesy disperse.
Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing,
And heavy ignorance aloft to fly,
Have added feathers to the learned's wing,
And given grace a double majesty.
Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
Whose influence is thine, and born of thee,
In others' works thou dost but mend the style,
And arts with thy sweet graces graced be.
  But thou art all my art, and dost advance
  As high as learning, my rude ignorance.


                   79
Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,
But now my gracious numbers are decayed,
And my sick muse doth give an other place.
I grant (sweet love) thy lovely argument
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent,
He robs thee of, and pays it thee again,
He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word,
From thy behaviour, beauty doth he give
And found it in thy cheek: he can afford
No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live.
  Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
  Since what he owes thee, thou thy self dost pay.


                   80
O how I faint when I of you do write,
Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame.
But since your worth (wide as the ocean is)
The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
My saucy bark (inferior far to his)
On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride,
Or (being wrecked) I am a worthless boat,
He of tall building, and of goodly pride.
  Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
  The worst was this, my love was my decay.


                   81
Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten,
From hence your memory death cannot take,
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
Though I (once gone) to all the world must die,
The earth can yield me but a common grave,
When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie,
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read,
And tongues to be, your being shall rehearse,
When all the breathers of this world are dead,
  You still shall live (such virtue hath my pen)
  Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.


                   82
I grant thou wert not married to my muse,
And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
The dedicated words which writers use
Of their fair subject, blessing every book.
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
Finding thy worth a limit past my praise,
And therefore art enforced to seek anew,
Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days.
And do so love, yet when they have devised,
What strained touches rhetoric can lend,
Thou truly fair, wert truly sympathized,
In true plain words, by thy true-telling friend.
  And their gross painting might be better used,
  Where cheeks need blood, in thee it is abused.


                   83
I never saw that you did painting need,
And therefore to your fair no painting set,
I found (or thought I found) you did exceed,
That barren tender of a poet's debt:
And therefore have I slept in your report,
That you your self being extant well might show,
How far a modern quill doth come too short,
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.
This silence for my sin you did impute,
Which shall be most my glory being dumb,
For I impair not beauty being mute,
When others would give life, and bring a tomb.
  There lives more life in one of your fair eyes,
  Than both your poets can in praise devise.


                   84
Who is it that says most, which can say more,
Than this rich praise, that you alone, are you?
In whose confine immured is the store,
Which should example where your equal grew.
Lean penury within that pen doth dwell,
That to his subject lends not some small glory,
But he that writes of you, if he can tell,
That you are you, so dignifies his story.
Let him but copy what in you is writ,
Not making worse what nature made so clear,
And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
Making his style admired every where.
  You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
  Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.


                   85
My tongue-tied muse in manners holds her still,
While comments of your praise richly compiled,
Reserve their character with golden quill,
And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.
I think good thoughts, whilst other write good words,
And like unlettered clerk still cry Amen,
To every hymn that able spirit affords,
In polished form of well refined pen.
Hearing you praised, I say 'tis so, 'tis true,
And to the most of praise add something more,
But that is in my thought, whose love to you
(Though words come hindmost) holds his rank before,
  Then others, for the breath of words respect,
  Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.


                   86
Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
Bound for the prize of (all too precious) you,
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write,
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
He nor that affable familiar ghost
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
As victors of my silence cannot boast,
I was not sick of any fear from thence.
  But when your countenance filled up his line,
  Then lacked I matter, that enfeebled mine.


                   87
Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
And like enough thou know'st thy estimate,
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing:
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting,
And for that riches where is my deserving?
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
And so my patent back again is swerving.
Thy self thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing,
Or me to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking,
So thy great gift upon misprision growing,
Comes home again, on better judgement making.
  Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter,
  In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.


                   88
When thou shalt be disposed to set me light,
And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
Upon thy side, against my self I'll fight,
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn:
With mine own weakness being best acquainted,
Upon thy part I can set down a story
Of faults concealed, wherein I am attainted:
That thou in losing me, shalt win much glory:
And I by this will be a gainer too,
For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
The injuries that to my self I do,
Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.
  Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
  That for thy right, my self will bear all wrong.


                   89
Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,
And I will comment upon that offence,
Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt:
Against thy reasons making no defence.
Thou canst not (love) disgrace me half so ill,
To set a form upon desired change,
As I'll my self disgrace, knowing thy will,
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange:
Be absent from thy walks and in my tongue,
Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
Lest I (too much profane) should do it wronk:
And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
  For thee, against my self I'll vow debate,
  For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.


                   90
Then hate me when thou wilt, if ever, now,
Now while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
And do not drop in for an after-loss:
Ah do not, when my heart hath 'scaped this sorrow,
Come in the rearward of a conquered woe,
Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,
To linger out a purposed overthrow.
If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,
When other petty griefs have done their spite,
But in the onset come, so shall I taste
At first the very worst of fortune's might.
  And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
  Compared with loss of thee, will not seem so.


                   91
Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
Some in their wealth, some in their body's force,
Some in their garments though new-fangled ill:
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse.
And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest,
But these particulars are not my measure,
All these I better in one general best.
Thy love is better than high birth to me,
Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' costs,
Of more delight than hawks and horses be:
And having thee, of all men's pride I boast.
  Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take,
  All this away, and me most wretchcd make.


                   92
But do thy worst to steal thy self away,
For term of life thou art assured mine,
And life no longer than thy love will stay,
For it depends upon that love of thine.
Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,
When in the least of them my life hath end,
I see, a better state to me belongs
Than that, which on thy humour doth depend.
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie,
O what a happy title do I find,
Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
  But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
  Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.


                   93
So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
Like a deceived husband, so love's face,
May still seem love to me, though altered new:
Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place.
For there can live no hatred in thine eye,
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change,
In many's looks, the false heart's history
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange.
But heaven in thy creation did decree,
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell,
Whate'er thy thoughts, or thy heart's workings be,
Thy looks should nothing thence, but sweetness tell.
  How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,
  If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show.


                   94
They that have power to hurt, and will do none,
That do not do the thing, they most do show,
Who moving others, are themselves as stone,
Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow:
They rightly do inherit heaven's graces,
And husband nature's riches from expense,
Tibey are the lords and owners of their faces,
Others, but stewards of their excellence:
The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,
Though to it self, it only live and die,
But if that flower with base infection meet,
The basest weed outbraves his dignity:
  For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds,
  Lilies that fester, smell far worse than weeds.


                   95
How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame,
Which like a canker in the fragrant rose,
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
O in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose!
That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
(Making lascivious comments on thy sport)
Cannot dispraise, but in a kind of praise,
Naming thy name, blesses an ill report.
O what a mansion have those vices got,
Which for their habitation chose out thee,
Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot,
And all things turns to fair, that eyes can see!
  Take heed (dear heart) of this large privilege,
  The hardest knife ill-used doth lose his edge.


                   96
Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness,
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport,
Both grace and faults are loved of more and less:
Thou mak'st faults graces, that to thee resort:
As on the finger of a throned queen,
The basest jewel will be well esteemed:
So are those errors that in thee are seen,
To truths translated, and for true things deemed.
How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
If like a lamb he could his looks translate!
How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
if thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!
  But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
  As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.


                   97
How like a winter hath my absence been
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!
What old December's bareness everywhere!
And yet this time removed was summer's time,
The teeming autumn big with rich increase,
Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
Like widowed wombs after their lords' decease:
Yet this abundant issue seemed to me
But hope of orphans, and unfathered fruit,
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
And thou away, the very birds are mute.
  Or if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer,
  That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.


                   98
From you have I been absent in the spring,
When proud-pied April (dressed in all his trim)
Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing:
That heavy Saturn laughed and leaped with him.
Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell
Of different flowers in odour and in hue,
Could make me any summer's story tell:
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose,
They were but sweet, but figures of delight:
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
  Yet seemed it winter still, and you away,
  As with your shadow I with these did play.


                   99
The forward violet thus did I chide,
Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,
If not from my love's breath? The purple pride
Which on thy soft check for complexion dwells,
In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dyed.
The lily I condemned for thy hand,
And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair,
The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
One blushing shame, another white despair:
A third nor red, nor white, had stol'n of both,
And to his robbery had annexed thy breath,
But for his theft in pride of all his growth
A vengeful canker eat him up to death.
  More flowers I noted, yet I none could see,
  But sweet, or colour it had stol'n from thee.


                   100
Where art thou Muse that thou forget'st so long,
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song,
Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?
Return forgetful Muse, and straight redeem,
In gentle numbers time so idly spent,
Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem,
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
Rise resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey,
If time have any wrinkle graven there,
If any, be a satire to decay,
And make time's spoils despised everywhere.
  Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life,
  So thou prevent'st his scythe, and crooked knife.


                   101
O truant Muse what shall be thy amends,
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed?
Both truth and beauty on my love depends:
So dost thou too, and therein dignified:
Make answer Muse, wilt thou not haply say,
'Truth needs no colour with his colour fixed,
Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay:
But best is best, if never intermixed'?
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
Excuse not silence so, for't lies in thee,
To make him much outlive a gilded tomb:
And to be praised of ages yet to be.
  Then do thy office Muse, I teach thee how,
  To make him seem long hence, as he shows now.


                   102
My love is strengthened though more weak in seeming,
I love not less, though less the show appear,
That love is merchandized, whose rich esteeming,
The owner's tongue doth publish every where.
Our love was new, and then but in the spring,
When I was wont to greet it with my lays,
As Philomel in summer's front doth sing,
And stops her pipe in growth of riper days:
Not that the summer is less pleasant now
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,
But that wild music burthens every bough,
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.
  Therefore like her, I sometime hold my tongue:
  Because I would not dull you with my song.


                   103
Alack what poverty my muse brings forth,
That having such a scope to show her pride,
The argument all bare is of more worth
Than when it hath my added praise beside.
O blame me not if I no more can write!
Look in your glass and there appears a face,
That over-goes my blunt invention quite,
Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace.
Were it not sinful then striving to mend,
To mar the subject that before was well?
For to no other pass my verses tend,
Than of your graces and your gifts to tell.
  And more, much more than in my verse can sit,
  Your own glass shows you, when you look in it.


                   104
To me fair friend you never can be old,
For as you were when first your eye I eyed,
Such seems your beauty still: three winters cold,
Have from the forests shook three summers' pride,
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned,
In process of the seasons have I seen,
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burned,
Since first I saw you fresh which yet are green.
Ah yet doth beauty like a dial hand,
Steal from his figure, and no pace perceived,
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand
Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceived.
  For fear of which, hear this thou age unbred,
  Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.


                   105
Let not my love be called idolatry,
Nor my beloved as an idol show,
Since all alike my songs and praises be
To one, of one, still such, and ever so.
Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind,
Still constant in a wondrous excellence,
Therefore my verse to constancy confined,
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
Fair, kind, and true, is all my argument,
Fair, kind, and true, varying to other words,
And in this change is my invention spent,
Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.
  Fair, kind, and true, have often lived alone.
  Which three till now, never kept seat in one.


                   106
When in the chronicle of wasted time,
I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
And beauty making beautiful old rhyme,
In praise of ladies dead, and lovely knights,
Then in the blazon of sweet beauty's best,
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
I see their antique pen would have expressed,
Even such a beauty as you master now.
So all their praises are but prophecies
Of this our time, all you prefiguring,
And for they looked but with divining eyes,
They had not skill enough your worth to sing:
  For we which now behold these present days,
  Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.


                   107
Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul,
Of the wide world, dreaming on things to come,
Can yet the lease of my true love control,
Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured,
And the sad augurs mock their own presage,
Incertainties now crown themselves assured,
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
Now with the drops of this most balmy time,
My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes,
Since spite of him I'll live in this poor rhyme,
While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes.
  And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
  When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.


                   108
What's in the brain that ink may character,
Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit,
What's new to speak, what now to register,
That may express my love, or thy dear merit?
Nothing sweet boy, but yet like prayers divine,
I must each day say o'er the very same,
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,
Even as when first I hallowed thy fair name.
So that eternal love in love's fresh case,
Weighs not the dust and injury of age,
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
But makes antiquity for aye his page,
  Finding the first conceit of love there bred,
  Where time and outward form would show it dead.


                   109
O never say that I was false of heart,
Though absence seemed my flame to qualify,
As easy might I from my self depart,
As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie:
That is my home of love, if I have ranged,
Like him that travels I return again,
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,
So that my self bring water for my stain,
Never believe though in my nature reigned,
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
That it could so preposterously be stained,
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good:
  For nothing this wide universe I call,
  Save thou my rose, in it thou art my all.


                   110
Alas 'tis true, I have gone here and there,
And made my self a motley to the view,
Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
Made old offences of affections new.
Most true it is, that I have looked on truth
Askance and strangely: but by all above,
These blenches gave my heart another youth,
And worse essays proved thee my best of love.
Now all is done, have what shall have no end,
Mine appetite I never more will grind
On newer proof, to try an older friend,
A god in love, to whom I am confined.
  Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
  Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.


                   111
O for my sake do you with Fortune chide,
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
That did not better for my life provide,
Than public means which public manners breeds.
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
And almost thence my nature is subdued
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand:
Pity me then, and wish I were renewed,
Whilst like a willing patient I will drink,
Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection,
No bitterness that I will bitter think,
Nor double penance to correct correction.
  Pity me then dear friend, and I assure ye,
  Even that your pity is enough to cure me.


                   112
Your love and pity doth th' impression fill,
Which vulgar scandal stamped upon my brow,
For what care I who calls me well or ill,
So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow?
You are my all the world, and I must strive,
To know my shames and praises from your tongue,
None else to me, nor I to none alive,
That my steeled sense or changes right or wrong.
In so profound abysm I throw all care
Of others' voices, that my adder's sense,
To critic and to flatterer stopped are:
Mark how with my neglect I do dispense.
  You are so strongly in my purpose bred,
  That all the world besides methinks are dead.


                   113
Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind,
And that which governs me to go about,
Doth part his function, and is partly blind,
Seems seeing, but effectually is out:
For it no form delivers to the heart
Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch,
Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch:
For if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight,
The most sweet favour or deformed'st creature,
The mountain, or the sea, the day, or night:
The crow, or dove, it shapes them to your feature.
  Incapable of more, replete with you,
  My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue.


                   114
Or whether doth my mind being crowned with you
Drink up the monarch's plague this flattery?
Or whether shall I say mine eye saith true,
And that your love taught it this alchemy?
To make of monsters, and things indigest,
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,
Creating every bad a perfect best
As fast as objects to his beams assemble:
O 'tis the first, 'tis flattery in my seeing,
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up,
Mine eye well knows what with his gust is 'greeing,
And to his palate doth prepare the cup.
  If it be poisoned, 'tis the lesser sin,
  That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.


                   115
Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
Even those that said I could not love you dearer,
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why,
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer,
But reckoning time, whose millioned accidents
Creep in 'twixt vows, and change decrees of kings,
Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents,
Divert strong minds to the course of alt'ring things:
Alas why fearing of time's tyranny,
Might I not then say 'Now I love you best,'
When I was certain o'er incertainty,
Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
  Love is a babe, then might I not say so
  To give full growth to that which still doth grow.


                   116
Let me not to the marriage of true minds
Admit impediments, love is not love
Which alters when it alteration finds,
Or bends with the remover to remove.
O no, it is an ever-fixed mark
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
It is the star to every wand'ring bark,
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
Within his bending sickle's compass come,
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
But bears it out even to the edge of doom:
  If this be error and upon me proved,
  I never writ, nor no man ever loved.


                   117
Accuse me thus, that I have scanted all,
Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
Forgot upon your dearest love to call,
Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day,
That I have frequent been with unknown minds,
And given to time your own dear-purchased right,
That I have hoisted sail to all the winds
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
Book both my wilfulness and errors down,
And on just proof surmise, accumulate,
Bring me within the level of your frown,
But shoot not at me in your wakened hate:
  Since my appeal says I did strive to prove
  The constancy and virtue of your love.


                   118
Like as to make our appetite more keen
With eager compounds we our palate urge,
As to prevent our maladies unseen,
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge.
Even so being full of your ne'er-cloying sweetness,
To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding;
And sick of welfare found a kind of meetness,
To be diseased ere that there was true needing.
Thus policy in love t' anticipate
The ills that were not, grew to faults assured,
And brought to medicine a healthful state
Which rank of goodness would by ill be cured.
  But thence I learn and find the lesson true,
  Drugs poison him that so feil sick of you.


                   119
What potions have I drunk of Siren tears
Distilled from limbecks foul as hell within,
Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears,
Still losing when I saw my self to win!
What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
Whilst it hath thought it self so blessed never!
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted
In the distraction of this madding fever!
O benefit of ill, now I find true
That better is, by evil still made better.
And ruined love when it is built anew
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
  So I return rebuked to my content,
  And gain by ills thrice more than I have spent.


                   120
That you were once unkind befriends me now,
And for that sorrow, which I then did feel,
Needs must I under my transgression bow,
Unless my nerves were brass or hammered steel.
For if you were by my unkindness shaken
As I by yours, y'have passed a hell of time,
And I a tyrant have no leisure taken
To weigh how once I suffered in your crime.
O that our night of woe might have remembered
My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits,
And soon to you, as you to me then tendered
The humble salve, which wounded bosoms fits!
  But that your trespass now becomes a fee,
  Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.


                   121
'Tis better to be vile than vile esteemed,
When not to be, receives reproach of being,
And the just pleasure lost, which is so deemed,
Not by our feeling, but by others' seeing.
For why should others' false adulterate eyes
Give salutation to my sportive blood?
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
No, I am that I am, and they that level
At my abuses, reckon up their own,
I may be straight though they themselves be bevel;
By their rank thoughts, my deeds must not be shown
  Unless this general evil they maintain,
  All men are bad and in their badness reign.


                   122
Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain
Full charactered with lasting memory,
Which shall above that idle rank remain
Beyond all date even to eternity.
Or at the least, so long as brain and heart
Have faculty by nature to subsist,
Till each to razed oblivion yield his part
Of thee, thy record never can be missed:
That poor retention could not so much hold,
Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score,
Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
To trust those tables that receive thee more:
  To keep an adjunct to remember thee
  Were to import forgetfulness in me.


                   123
No! Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change,
Thy pyramids built up with newer might
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange,
They are but dressings Of a former sight:
Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire,
What thou dost foist upon us that is old,
And rather make them born to our desire,
Than think that we before have heard them told:
Thy registers and thee I both defy,
Not wond'ring at the present, nor the past,
For thy records, and what we see doth lie,
Made more or less by thy continual haste:
  This I do vow and this shall ever be,
  I will be true despite thy scythe and thee.


                   124
If my dear love were but the child of state,
It might for Fortune's bastard be unfathered,
As subject to time's love or to time's hate,
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gathered.
No it was builded far from accident,
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
Under the blow of thralled discontent,
Whereto th' inviting time our fashion calls:
It fears not policy that heretic,
Which works on leases of short-numbered hours,
But all alone stands hugely politic,
That it nor grows with heat, nor drowns with showers.
  To this I witness call the fools of time,
  Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.


                   125
Were't aught to me I bore the canopy,
With my extern the outward honouring,
Or laid great bases for eternity,
Which proves more short than waste or ruining?
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour
Lose all, and more by paying too much rent
For compound sweet; forgoing simple savour,
Pitiful thrivers in their gazing spent?
No, let me be obsequious in thy heart,
And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
Which is not mixed with seconds, knows no art,
But mutual render, only me for thee.
  Hence, thou suborned informer, a true soul
  When most impeached, stands least in thy control.


                   126
O thou my lovely boy who in thy power,
Dost hold Time's fickle glass his fickle hour:
Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st,
Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow'st.
If Nature (sovereign mistress over wrack)
As thou goest onwards still will pluck thee back,
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
May time disgrace, and wretched minutes kill.
Yet fear her O thou minion of her pleasure,
She may detain, but not still keep her treasure!
  Her audit (though delayed) answered must be,
  And her quietus is to render thee.


                   127
In the old age black was not counted fair,
Or if it were it bore not beauty's name:
But now is black beauty's successive heir,
And beauty slandered with a bastard shame,
For since each hand hath put on nature's power,
Fairing the foul with art's false borrowed face,
Sweet beauty hath no name no holy bower,
But is profaned, if not lives in disgrace.
Therefore my mistress' eyes are raven black,
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem,
At such who not born fair no beauty lack,
Slandering creation with a false esteem,
  Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe,
  That every tongue says beauty should look so.


                   128
How oft when thou, my music, music play'st,
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
With thy sweet fingers when thou gently sway'st
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap,
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
Whilst my poor lips which should that harvest reap,
At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand.
To be so tickled they would change their state
And situation with those dancing chips,
O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
Making dead wood more blest than living lips,
  Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
  Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.


                   129
Th' expense of spirit in a waste of shame
Is lust in action, and till action, lust
Is perjured, murd'rous, bloody full of blame,
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust,
Enjoyed no sooner but despised straight,
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had
Past reason hated as a swallowed bait,
On purpose laid to make the taker mad.
Mad in pursuit and in possession so,
Had, having, and in quest, to have extreme,
A bliss in proof and proved, a very woe,
Before a joy proposed behind a dream.
  All this the world well knows yet none knows well,
  To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.


                   130
My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun,
Coral is far more red, than her lips red,
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun:
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head:
I have seen roses damasked, red and white,
But no such roses see I in her cheeks,
And in some perfumes is there more delight,
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know,
That music hath a far more pleasing sound:
I grant I never saw a goddess go,
My mistress when she walks treads on the ground.
  And yet by heaven I think my love as rare,
  As any she belied with false compare.


                   131
Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart
Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
Yet in good faith some say that thee behold,
Thy face hath not the power to make love groan;
To say they err, I dare not be so bold,
Although I swear it to my self alone.
And to be sure that is not false I swear,
A thousand groans but thinking on thy face,
One on another's neck do witness bear
Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place.
  In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
  And thence this slander as I think proceeds.


                   132
Thine eyes I love, and they as pitying me,
Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain,
Have put on black, and loving mourners be,
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
And truly not the morning sun of heaven
Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,
Nor that full star that ushers in the even
Doth half that glory to the sober west
As those two mourning eyes become thy face:
O let it then as well beseem thy heart
To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace,
And suit thy pity like in every part.
  Then will I swear beauty herself is black,
  And all they foul that thy complexion lack.


                   133
Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me;
Is't not enough to torture me alone,
But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be?
Me from my self thy cruel eye hath taken,
And my next self thou harder hast engrossed,
Of him, my self, and thee I am forsaken,
A torment thrice three-fold thus to be crossed:
Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward,
But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail,
Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard,
Thou canst not then use rigour in my gaol.
  And yet thou wilt, for I being pent in thee,
  Perforce am thine and all that is in me.


                   134
So now I have confessed that he is thine,
And I my self am mortgaged to thy will,
My self I'll forfeit, so that other mine,
Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still:
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
For thou art covetous, and he is kind,
He learned but surety-like to write for me,
Under that bond that him as fist doth bind.
The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
Thou usurer that put'st forth all to use,
And sue a friend, came debtor for my sake,
So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
  Him have I lost, thou hast both him and me,
  He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.


                   135
Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy will,
And 'Will' to boot, and 'Will' in over-plus,
More than enough am I that vex thee still,
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
Wilt thou whose will is large and spacious,
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
Shall will in others seem right gracious,
And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
The sea all water, yet receives rain still,
And in abundance addeth to his store,
So thou being rich in will add to thy will
One will of mine to make thy large will more.
  Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill,
  Think all but one, and me in that one 'Will.'


                   136
If thy soul check thee that I come so near,
Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy 'Will',
And will thy soul knows is admitted there,
Thus far for love, my love-suit sweet fulfil.
'Will', will fulfil the treasure of thy love,
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one,
In things of great receipt with case we prove,
Among a number one is reckoned none.
Then in the number let me pass untold,
Though in thy store's account I one must be,
For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold,
That nothing me, a something sweet to thee.
  Make but my name thy love, and love that still,
  And then thou lov'st me for my name is Will.


                   137
Thou blind fool Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,
That they behold and see not what they see?
They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
Yet what the best is, take the worst to be.
If eyes corrupt by over-partial looks,
Be anchored in the bay where all men ride,
Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
Why should my heart think that a several plot,
Which my heart knows the wide world's common place?
Or mine eyes seeing this, say this is not
To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
  In things right true my heart and eyes have erred,
  And to this false plague are they now transferred.


                   138
When my love swears that she is made of truth,
I do believe her though I know she lies,
That she might think me some untutored youth,
Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Although she knows my days are past the best,
Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue,
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed:
But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
O love's best habit is in seeming trust,
And age in love, loves not to have years told.
  Therefore I lie with her, and she with me,
  And in our faults by lies we flattered be.


                   139
O call not me to justify the wrong,
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart,
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue,
Use power with power, and slay me not by art,
Tell me thou lov'st elsewhere; but in my sight,
Dear heart forbear to glance thine eye aside,
What need'st thou wound with cunning when thy might
Is more than my o'erpressed defence can bide?
Let me excuse thee, ah my love well knows,
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies,
And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries:
  Yet do not so, but since I am near slain,
  Kill me outright with looks, and rid my pain.


                   140
Be wise as thou art cruel, do not press
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain:
Lest sorrow lend me words and words express,
The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
If I might teach thee wit better it were,
Though not to love, yet love to tell me so,
As testy sick men when their deaths be near,
No news but health from their physicians know.
For if I should despair I should grow mad,
And in my madness might speak ill of thee,
Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,
Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be.
  That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
  Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.


                   141
In faith I do not love thee with mine eyes,
For they in thee a thousand errors note,
But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise,
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote.
Nor are mine cars with thy tongue's tune delighted,
Nor tender feeling to base touches prone,
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
To any sensual feast with thee alone:
But my five wits, nor my five senses can
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
Who leaves unswayed the likeness of a man,
Thy proud heart's slave and vassal wretch to be:
  Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
  That she that makes me sin, awards me pain.


                   142
Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate,
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving,
O but with mine, compare thou thine own state,
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving,
Or if it do, not from those lips of thine,
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments,
And sealed false bonds of love as oft as mine,
Robbed others' beds' revenues of their rents.
Be it lawful I love thee as thou lov'st those,
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee,
Root pity in thy heart that when it grows,
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
  If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
  By self-example mayst thou be denied.


                   143
Lo as a careful huswife runs to catch,
One of her feathered creatures broke away,
Sets down her babe and makes all swift dispatch
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay:
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent,
To follow that which flies before her face:
Not prizing her poor infant's discontent;
So run'st thou after that which flies from thee,
Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind,
But if thou catch thy hope turn back to me:
And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind.
  So will I pray that thou mayst have thy Will,
  If thou turn back and my loud crying still.


                   144
Two loves I have of comfort and despair,
Which like two spirits do suggest me still,
The better angel is a man right fair:
The worser spirit a woman coloured ill.
To win me soon to hell my female evil,
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil:
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
And whether that my angel be turned fiend,
Suspect I may, yet not directly tell,
But being both from me both to each friend,
I guess one angel in another's hell.
  Yet this shall I ne'er know but live in doubt,
  Till my bad angel fire my good one out.


                   145
Those lips that Love's own hand did make,
Breathed forth the sound that said 'I hate',
To me that languished for her sake:
But when she saw my woeful state,
Straight in her heart did mercy come,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet,
Was used in giving gentle doom:
And taught it thus anew to greet:
'I hate' she altered with an end,
That followed it as gentle day,
Doth follow night who like a fiend
From heaven to hell is flown away.
  'I hate', from hate away she threw,
  And saved my life saying 'not you'.


                   146
Poor soul the centre of my sinful earth,
My sinful earth these rebel powers array,
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Why so large cost having so short a lease,
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
Shall worms inheritors of this excess
Eat up thy charge? is this thy body's end?
Then soul live thou upon thy servant's loss,
And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
Within be fed, without be rich no more,
  So shall thou feed on death, that feeds on men,
  And death once dead, there's no more dying then.


                   147
My love is as a fever longing still,
For that which longer nurseth the disease,
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
Th' uncertain sickly appetite to please:
My reason the physician to my love,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve,
Desire is death, which physic did except.
Past cure I am, now reason is past care,
And frantic-mad with evermore unrest,
My thoughts and my discourse as mad men's are,
At random from the truth vainly expressed.
  For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright,
  Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.


                   148
O me! what eyes hath love put in my head,
Which have no correspondence with true sight,
Or if they have, where is my judgment fled,
That censures falsely what they see aright?
If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
What means the world to say it is not so?
If it be not, then love doth well denote,
Love's eye is not so true as all men's: no,
How can it? O how can love's eye be true,
That is so vexed with watching and with tears?
No marvel then though I mistake my view,
The sun it self sees not, till heaven clears.
  O cunning love, with tears thou keep'st me blind,
  Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.


                   149
Canst thou O cruel, say I love thee not,
When I against my self with thee partake?
Do I not think on thee when I forgot
Am of my self, all-tyrant, for thy sake?
Who hateth thee that I do call my friend,
On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon,
Nay if thou lour'st on me do I not spend
Revenge upon my self with present moan?
What merit do I in my self respect,
That is so proud thy service to despise,
When all my best doth worship thy defect,
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
  But love hate on for now I know thy mind,
  Those that can see thou lov'st, and I am blind.


                   150
O from what power hast thou this powerful might,
With insufficiency my heart to sway,
To make me give the lie to my true sight,
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
That in the very refuse of thy deeds,
There is such strength and warrantise of skill,
That in my mind thy worst all best exceeds?
Who taught thee how to make me love thee more,
The more I hear and see just cause of hate?
O though I love what others do abhor,
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state.
  If thy unworthiness raised love in me,
  More worthy I to be beloved of thee.


                   151
Love is too young to know what conscience is,
Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?
Then gentle cheater urge not my amiss,
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove.
For thou betraying me, I do betray
My nobler part to my gross body's treason,
My soul doth tell my body that he may,
Triumph in love, flesh stays no farther reason,
But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
As his triumphant prize, proud of this pride,
He is contented thy poor drudge to be,
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
  No want of conscience hold it that I call,
  Her love, for whose dear love I rise and fall.


                   152
In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn,
But thou art twice forsworn to me love swearing,
In act thy bed-vow broke and new faith torn,
In vowing new hate after new love bearing:
But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee,
When I break twenty? I am perjured most,
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee:
And all my honest faith in thee is lost.
For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness:
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy,
And to enlighten thee gave eyes to blindness,
Or made them swear against the thing they see.
  For I have sworn thee fair: more perjured I,
  To swear against the truth so foul a be.


                   153
Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep,
A maid of Dian's this advantage found,
And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep
In a cold valley-fountain of that ground:
Which borrowed from this holy fire of Love,
A dateless lively heat still to endure,
And grew a seeting bath which yet men prove,
Against strange maladies a sovereign cure:
But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired,
The boy for trial needs would touch my breast,
I sick withal the help of bath desired,
And thither hied a sad distempered guest.
  But found no cure, the bath for my help lies,
  Where Cupid got new fire; my mistress' eyes.


                   154
The little Love-god lying once asleep,
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
Whilst many nymphs that vowed chaste life to keep,
Came tripping by, but in her maiden hand,
The fairest votary took up that fire,
Which many legions of true hearts had warmed,
And so the general of hot desire,
Was sleeping by a virgin hand disarmed.
This brand she quenched in a cool well by,
Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual,
Growing a bath and healthful remedy,
For men discased, but I my mistress' thrall,
  Came there for cure and this by that I prove,
  Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.


I

    Happy ye leaves when as those lily hands,
        Which hold my life in their dead-doing might, 
        Shall handle you and hold in love's soft bands, 
        Like captives trembling at the victor's sight. 
    And happy lines, on which with starry light,
        Those lamping eyes will deign sometimes to look 
        And read the sorrows of my dying sprite, 
        Written with tears in heart's close-bleeding book. 
    And happy rhymes bath'd in the sacred brook,
        Of Helicon whence she derived is, 
        When ye behold that Angel's blessed look, 
        My soul's long-lacked food, my heaven's bliss. 
    Leaves, lines, and rhymes, seek her to please alone,
        Whom if ye please, I care for other none. 

II

    Unquiet thought, whom at the first I bred,
        Of th' inward bale of my love-pined heart: 
        And sithens have with sighs and sorrows fed, 
        Till greater then my womb thou woxen art. 
    Break forth at length out of the inner part,
        In which thou lurkest like to viper's brood: 
        And seek some succour both to ease my smart 
        And also to sustain thy self with food. 
    But if in presence of that fairest proud
        Thou chance to come, fall lowly at her feet: 
        And with meek humbless and afflicted mood, 
        Pardon for thee, and grace for me entreat. 
    Which if she grant, then live, and my love cherish,
        If not, die soon, and I with thee will perish. 

III

    Thou sovereign beauty which I do admire,
        Witness the world how worthy to be praised: 
        The light whereof hath kindled heavenly fire, 
        In my frail spirit by her from baseness raised. 
    That being now with her huge brightness dazed,
        Base things I can no more endure to view; 
        But looking still on her I stand amazed, 
        At wondrous sight of so celestial hew. 
    So when my tongue would speak her praises due,
        It stopped is with thought's astonishment: 
        And when my pen would write her titles true, 
        It ravished is with fancy's wonderment: 
    Yet in my heart I then both speak and write
        The wonder that my wit cannot endite. 

IV

    New year forth looking out of Janus' gate,
        Doth seem to promise hope of new delight: 
        And bidding th' old Adieu, his passed date 
        Bids all old thoughts to die in dumpish sprite. 
    And calling forth out of sad Winter's night,
        Fresh love, that long hath slept in cheerless bower: 
        Wills him awake, and soon about him dight 
        His wanton wings and darts of deadly power. 
    For lusty spring now in his timely hour,
        Is ready to come forth him to receive; 
        And warns the Earth with diverse colored flower, 
        To deck herself, and her fair mantle weave. 
    Then you fair flower, in whom fresh youth doth rain,
        Prepare yourself new love to entertain. 

V

    Rudely thou wrongest my dear heart's desire,
        In finding fault with her too portly pride: 
        The thing which I do most in her admire, 
        Is of the world unworthy most envied. 
    For in those lofty looks is close implied,
        Scorn of base things, and sdeigne of foul dishonor: 
        Threatening rash eyes which gaze on her so wide, 
        That loosely they ne dare to look upon her. 
    Such pride is praise, such portliness is honor,
        That boldened innocence bears in her eyes: 
        And her fair countenance like a goodly banner, 
        Spreads in defiance of all enemies. 
    Was never in this world ought worthy tried,
        Without some spark of such self-pleasing pride. 

VI

    Be not dismayed that her unmoved mind
        Doth still persist in her rebellious pride: 
        And love not like to lusts of baser kind, 
        The harder won, the firmer will abide. 
    The durefull Oak, whose sap is not yet dried,
        Is long ere it conceive the kindling fire; 
        But when it once doth burn, it doth divide, 
        Great heat, and makes his flames to heaven aspire. 
    So hard it is to kindle new desire,
        In gentle breast that shall endure for ever: 
        Deep is the wound, that dints the parts entire 
        With chaste affects, that naught but death can sever. 
    Then think not long in taking little pain,
        To knit the knot, that ever shall remain. 

VII

    Fair eyes, the mirror of my mazed heart,
        What wondrous virtue is contained in you, 
        The which both life and death forth from you dart 
        Into the object of your mighty view? 
    For when ye mildly look with lovely hew,
        Then is my soul with life and love inspired 
        But when ye lour, or look on me askew, 
        Then do I die, as one with lightning fired. 
    But since that life is more than death desired,
        Look ever lovely, as becomes you best, 
        That your bright beams of my weak eyes admired, 
        May kindle living fire within my breast. 
    Such life should be the honor of your light,
        Such death the sad ensample of your might. 

VIII

    More than most fair, full of the living fire,
        Kindled above unto the maker near: 
        No eyes but joys, in which all powers conspire, 
        That to the world naught else be counted dear. 
    Through your bright beams doth not the blinded guest,
        Shoot out his darts to base affections wound: 
        But Angels come to lead frail minds to rest 
        In chaste desires on heavenly beauty bound. 
    You frame my thoughts and fashion me within,
        You stop my tongue, and teach my heart to speak, 
        You calm the storm that passion did begin, 
        Strong through your cause, but by your virtue weak. 
    Dark is the world, where your light shined never;
        Well is he born, that may behold you ever. 

IX

    Long-while I sought to what I might compare
        Those powerful eyes, which lighten my dark sprite, 
        Yet find I nought on earth to which I dare 
        Resemble th'image of their goodly light. 
    Not to the sun: for they do shine by night;
        Nor to the moon: for they are changed never; 
        Nor to the stars: for they have purer sight; 
        Nor to the fire: for they consume not ever; 
    Nor to the lightening: for they still persever;
        Nor to the diamond: for they are more tender; 
        Nor unto crystal: for nought may them sever; 
        Nor unto glass: such baseness mought offend her; 
    Then to the Maker self they likest be,
        Whose light doth lighten all that here we see. 

X

    Unrighteous lord of love, what law is this,
        That me thou makest thus tormented be: 
        The whiles she lordeth in licentious bliss 
        Of her freewill, scorning both thee and me. 
    See how the Tyraness doth joy to see
        The huge massacres which her eyes do make: 
        And humbled hearts brings captives unto thee, 
        That thou of them mayst mighty vengeance take. 
    But her proud heart do thou a little shake
        And that high look, with which she doth comptroll 
        All this world's pride, bow to a baser make, 
        And all her faults in thy black book enroll. 
    That I may laugh at her in equal sort,
        As she doth laugh at me and makes my pain her sport. 

XI

    Daily when I do seek and sew for peace,
        And hostages do offer for my truth: 
        She cruel warrior doth herself address 
        To battle, and the weary war renew'th. 
    Nor will be moved with reason or with ruth,
        To grant small respite to my restless toil: 
        But greedily her fell intent persueth, 
        Of my poor life to make unpityed spoil. 
    Yet my poor life, all sorrows to assoyle,
        I would her yield, her wrath to pacify: 
        But then she seeks with torment and turmoil, 
        To force me live, and will not let me die. 
    All pain hath end and every war hath peace,
        But mine no price nor prayer may surcease. 

XII

    One day I sought with her heart-thrilling eyes
        To make a truce, and terms to entertain; 
        All fearless then of so false enemies, 
        Which sought me to entrap in treason's train. 
    So as I then disarmed did remain,
        A wicked ambush which lay hidden long 
        In the close court of her guileful eyen, 
        Thence breaking forth did thick about me throng. 
    Too feeble I t'abide the brunt so strong,
        Was forced to yield myself into their hands: 
        Who me captiving straight with rigorous wrong, 
        Have ever since me kept in cruel bands. 
    So Lady, now to you I do complain
        Against your eyes that justice I may gain. 

XIII

    In that proud port, which her so goodly graceth,
        Whiles her fair face she rears up to the sky: 
        And to the ground her eyelids low embaseth, 
        Most goodly temperature ye may descry, 
    Mild humbless mixed with awful majesty.
        For looking on the earth whence she was born, 
        Her mind remembreth her mortality, 
        What so is fairest shall to earth return. 
    But that same lofty countenance seems to scorn
        Base thing, and think how she to heaven may climb: 
        Treading down earth as lothsome and forlorn, 
        That hinders heavenly thoughts with drossy slime. 
    Yet lowly still vouchsafe to look on me,
        Such lowliness shall make you lofty be. 

XIV

    Return again my forces late dismayed,
        Unto the siege by you abondon'd quite, 
        Great shame it is to leave like one afraid, 
        So fair a peace for one repulse so light. 
    'Gainst such strong castles needeth greater might,
        Than those small forts which ye were wont belay: 
        Such haughty minds enur'd to hardy fight 
        Disdain to yield unto the first assay. 
    Bring therefore all the forces that ye may,
        And lay incessant battery to her heart, 
        Plaints, prayers, vows, ruth, sorrow, and dismay, 
        Those engines can the proudest love convert. 
    And if those fail, fall down and die before her,
        So dying live, and living do adore her. 

XV

    Ye tradefull Merchants, that with weary toil,
        Do seek most precious things to make your gain; 
        And both the Indias of their treasures spoil, 
        What needeth you to seek so far in vain? 
    For lo my love doth in her self contain
        All this world's riches that may far be found, 
        If saphires, lo her eyes be saphires plain, 
        If rubies, lo her lips be rubies sound: 
    If pearls, her teeth be pearls both pure and round;
        If ivory, her forhead ivory weene; 
        If gold, her locks are finest gold on ground; 
        If silver, her fair hands are silver sheen. 
    But that which fairest is, but few behold,
        Her mind adorned with virtues manifold. 

XVI

    One day as I unwarily did gaze
        On those fair eyes my love's immortal light: 
        The whiles my 'stonished heart stood in amaze, 
        Through sweet illusion of her look's delight. 
    I mote perceive how in her glancing sight,
        Legions of loves with little wings did fly: 
        Darting their deadly arrows fiery bright, 
        At every rash beholder passing by. 
    One of those archers closely I did spy,
        Aiming his arrow at my very heart: 
        When suddenly with twinkle of her eye, 
        The Damsel broke his misintended dart. 
    Had she not so done, sure I had been slain,
        Yet as it was, I hardly 'scaped with pain. 

XVII

    The glorious portrait of that Angel's face,
        Made to amaze weak men's confused skill: 
        And this world's worthless glory to embase, 
        What pen, what pencil can express her fill? 
    For though he colours could devise at will,
        And eke his learned hand at pleasure guide, 
        Least trembling it his workmanship should spill, 
        Yet many wondrous things there are beside. 
    The sweet eye-glances, that like arrows glide,
        The charming smiles, that rob sense from the heart: 
        The lovely pleasance and the lofty pride, 
        Cannot expressed be by any art. 
    A greater craftsman's hand thereto doth need,
        That can express the life of things indeed. 

XVIII

    The rolling wheel that runneth often round,
        The hardest steel in tract of time doth tear: 
        And drizling drops that often do redound, 
        The firmest flint doth in continuance wear. 
    Yet cannot I, with many a dropping tear,
        And long entreaty, soften her hard heart: 
        That she will once vouchsafe my plaint to hear, 
        Or look with pity on my painful smart. 
    But when I plead, she bids me play my part,
        And when I weep, she says tears are but water: 
        And when I sigh, she says I know the art, 
        And when I wail she turns herself to laughter. 
    So do I weep, and wail, and plead in vain,
        Whiles she as steel and flint doth still remain. 

XIX

    The merry cuckoo, messenger of spring,
        His trumpet shrill hath thrice already sounded: 
        That warns all lovers wait upon their king, 
        Who now is coming forth with garland crowned. 
    With noise whereof the choir of birds resounded
        Their anthems sweet devised of love's praise, 
        That all the woods their echoes back rebounded, 
        As if they knew the meaning of their lays. 
    But 'mongst them all, which did Love's honor raise
        No word was heard of her that most it ought, 
        But she his precept proudly disobeys, 
        And doth his idle message set at nought. 
    Therefore O love, unless she turn to thee
        Ere cuckoo end, let her a rebel be. 

XX

    In vain I seek and sue to her for grace,
        And do mine humbled heart before her pour, 
        The whiles her foot she in my neck doth place, 
        And tread my life down in the lowly floor. 
    And yet the lion that is lord of power,
        And reighneth over every beast in field, 
        In his most pride disdaineth to devour 
        The silly lamb that to his might doth yield. 
    But she more cruel and more savage wild,
        Then either lion or lioness: 
        Shames not to be with guiltless blood defiled, 
        But taketh glory in her cruelness. 
    Fairer than fairest, let none ever say,
        That ye were blooded in a yielded prey. 

XXI

    Was it the work of nature or of art,
        Which tempered so the feature of her face, 
        That pride and meekness mixed by equal part, 
        Do both appear t'adorn her beauty's grace? 
    For with mild pleasance, which doth pride displace,
        She to her love doth lookers' eyes allure: 
        And with stern countenance back again doth chase 
        Their looser looks that stir up lusts impure. 
    With such strange terms her eyes she doth inure,
        That with one look she doth my life dismay: 
        And with another doth it straight recure, 
        Her smile me draws, her frown me drives away. 
    Thus doth she train and teach me with her looks,
        Such art of eyes I never read in books. 

XXII

    This holy season fit to fast and pray,
        Men to devotion ought to be inclined: 
        Therefore, I likewise on so holy day, 
        For my sweet Saint some service fit will find. 
    Her temple fair is built within my mind,
        In which her glorious image placed is, 
        On which my thoughts do day and night attend 
        Like sacred priests that never think amiss. 
    There I to her as th'author of my bliss
        Will build an altar to appease her ire: 
        And on the same my heart will sacrifice, 
        Burning in flames of pure and chaste desire: 
    The which vouchsafe O godess to accept
        Amongst thy dearest relics to be kept. 

XXIII

    Penelope for her Ulysses' sake,
        Devised a web her wooers to deceive; 
        In which the work that she all day did make 
        The same at night she did again unreave. 
    Such subtle craft my Damsel doth conceive,
        Th'importune suit of my desire to shun: 
        For all that I in many days do weave, 
        In one short hour I find by her undone. 
    So when I think to end that I begun,
        I must begin and never bring to end: 
        For with one look she spills that long I spun, 
        And with one word my whole year's work doth rend. 
    Such labour like the spider's web I find,
        Whose fruitless work is broken with least wind. 

XXIV

    When I behold that beauty's wonderment,
        And rare perfection of each goodly part; 
        Of nature's skill the only complement, 
        I honor and admire the maker's art. 
    But when I feel the bitter baleful smart,
        Which her fair eyes unwares do work in me: 
        That death out of their shiny beams do dart, 
        I think that I a new Pandora see; 
    Whom all the Gods in council did agree,
        Into this sinful world from heaven to send: 
        That she to wicked men a scourge should be, 
        For all their faults with which they did offend. 
    But since ye are my scourge I will intreat,
        That for my faults ye will me gently beat. 

XXV

    How long shall this like dying life endure,
        And know no end of her own mystery: 
        But waste and wear away in terms unsure, 
        'Twixt fear and hope depending doubtfully? 
    Yet better were at once to let me die,
        And show the last ensample of your pride: 
        Than to torment me thus with cruelty, 
        To prove your power, which I too well have tried. 
    But yet if in your hardened breast ye hide,
        A close intent at last to show me grace: 
        Then all the woes and wrecks which I abide, 
        As means of bliss I gladly will embrace. 
    And wish that more and greater they might be,
        That greater meede at last may turn to me. 

XXVI

    Sweet is the rose, but grows upon a briar;
        Sweet in the Juniper, but sharp his bough; 
        Sweet is the Eglantine, but pricketh near; 
        Sweet is the firbloom, but his branches rough. 
    Sweet is the Cypress, but his rind is tough,
        Sweet is the nut, but bitter is his pill; 
        Sweet is the broom-flower, but yet sour enough; 
        And sweet is Moly, but his root is ill. 
    So every sweet with sour is tempered still
        That maketh it be coveted the more: 
        For easy things that may be got at will, 
        Most sorts of men do set but little store. 
    Why then should I account of little pain,
        That endless pleasure shall unto me gain. 

XXVII

    Fair proud now tell me why should fair be proud,
        Sith all world's glory is but dross unclean: 
        And in the shade of death itself shall shroud, 
        But ever now thereof ye little weene. 
    That goodly idol now so gay beseen,
        Shall doff her flesh's borrowed fair attire: 
        And be forgot as it had never been, 
        That many now much worship and admire. 
    Ne any then shall after it inquire,
        Ne any mention shall thereof remain: 
        But what this verse, that never shall expire, 
        Shall to you purchase with her thankless pain. 
    Fair be no longer proud of that shall perish,
        But that which shall you make immortal, cherish. 

XXVIII

    The laurel leaf, which you this day do wear,
        Gives me great hope of your relenting mind: 
        For since it is the badge which I do bear, 
        Ye wearing it do seem to me inclined: 
    The power thereof, which of in me I find,
        Let in likewise your gentle breast inspire 
        With sweet infusion, and put you in mind 
        Of that proud maid, whom now those leave attire: 
    Proud Daphne scorning Phoebus' lovely fire,
        On the Thessalian shore from him did fly: 
        For which the gods in their revengeful ire 
        Did her transform into a laurel tree. 
    Then fly no more fair love from Phoebus' chace,
        But in your breast his leaf and love embrace. 

XXIX

    See how the stubborn damsel doth deprave
        My simple meaning with disdainful scorn: 
        And by the bay which I unto her gave, 
        Accounts myself her captive quite forlorn. 
    The bay (quoth she) is of the victors borne,
        Yielded them by the vanquished as their meeds, 
        And they therewith do poets' heads adorn, 
        To sing the glory of their famous deeds. 
    But sith she will the conquest challenge needs,
        Let her accept me as her faithful thrall, 
        That her great triumph which my skill exceeds, 
        I may in trump of fame blaze over all. 
    Then would I deck her head with glorious bays,
        And fill the world with her victorious praise. 

XXX

    My love is like to ice, and I to fire;
        How comes it then that this her cold so great 
        Is not dissolved through my so-hot desire, 
        But harder grows the more I her intreat? 
    Or how comes it that my exceeding heat
        Is not delayed by her heart frozen cold; 
        But that I burn much more in boiling sweat, 
        And feel my flames augmented manifold? 
    What more miraculous thing may be told
        That fire which all things melts, should harden ice: 
        And ice which is congealed with senseless cold, 
        Should kindle fire by wonderful device? 
    Such is the power of love in gentle mind,
        That it can alter all the course of kind. 

XXXI

    Ah why hath nature to so hard a heart
        Given so goodly gifts of beauty's grace?
        Whose pride depraves each other better part,
        And all those pretty ornaments deface.
    Sith to all other beasts of bloody race,
        A dreadful countenance she given hath,
        That with their terror all the rest may chase,
        And warn to shun the danger of their wrath.
    But my proud one doth work the greater scath,
        Through sweet allurement of her lovely hue:
        That she the better may in bloody bath
        Of such poor thralls her cruel hands embrew.
    But did she know how ill these two accord,
        Such cruelty she would have soon abhored.

XXXII

    The painful smith with force of fervent heat,
        The hardest iron soon doth mollify:
        That with his heavy sledge he can it beat,
        And fashion to what he it list apply.
    Yet cannot all these flames in which I fry,
        Her heart more hard than iron soft a whit:
        Ne all the plaints and prayers with which I
        Do beat on th'anvil of her stubborn wit;
    But still the more she fervent sees my fit,
        The more she frieseth in her willful pride:
        And harder grows the harder she is smit,
        With all the plaints which to her be applied.
    What then remains but I to ashes burn,
        And she to stones at length all frozen turn?

XXXIII

    Great wrong I do, I can it not deny,
        To that most sacred empress my dear dread,
        Not finishing her Queen of Fa&ed.ry,
        That mote enlarge her living praises dead;
    But lodwick, this of grace to me aread:
        Do ye not think the'accomplishment of it,
        Sufficient work for one man's simple head,
        All were it as the rest but rudely writ.
    How then should I without another wit,
        Think ever to endure so tedious toil,
        Sins that this one is tossed with troublous fit,
        Of a proud love, that both my spirit spoil.
    Cease then, till she vouchsafe to grant me rest,
        Or lend you me another loving breast.

XXXIV

    Like a ship that through the Ocean wide,
        By conduct of some star doth make her way,
        Whenas a storm hath dimmed her trusty guide,
        Out of her course doth wander far astray.
    So I whose star, that wont with her bright ray,
        Me to direct, with clouds is overcast,
        Do wander now in darkness and dismay,
        Through hidden perils round about me plast.
    Yet hope I well, that when this storm is past
        My Helice the lodestar of my life
        Will shine again, and look on me at last,
        With lovely light to clear my cloudy grief.
    Till then I wander carefull comfortless,
        In secret sorrow and sad pensiveness.

XXXV

    My hungry eyes through greedy covetize,
        Still to behold the object of their pain,
        With no contentment can themselves suffice:
        But having pine and having not complain.
    For lacking it they cannot life sustain,
        And having it they gaze on it the more:
        In their amazement like Narcissus vain
        Whose eyes him starv'd: so plenty makes me poor.
    Yet are mine eyes so filled with the store
        Of that fair sight, that nothing else they brook,
        But loath the things which they did like before,
        And can no more endure on them to look.
    All this world's glory seemeth vain to me,
        And all their shows but shadows, saving she.

XXXVI

    Tell me when shall these weary woes have end,
        Or shall their ruthless torment never cease:
        But all my days in pining langor spend,
        Without hope of aswagement or release.
    Is there no means for me to purchase peace,
        Or make agreement with her thrilling eyes:
        But that their cruelty doth still increase,
        And daily more augment my miseries.
    But when ye have shewed all extermities,
        Then think how little glory ye have gained:
        By slaying him, whose life though ye dispise,
        Mote have your life in honour long maintained.
    But by his death which some perhaps will moan,
        Ye shall condemned be of many a one.

XXXVII

    What guile is this, that those her golden tresses,
        She doth attire under a net of gold:
        And with sly skill so cunningly them dresses,
        That which is gold or hair, may scarce be told?
    Is it that men's frail eyes, which gaze too bold,
        She may entangle in that golden snare:
        And being caught may craftily enfold,
        Their weaker hearts, which are not well aware?
    Take heed therefore, mine eyes, how ye do stare
        Henceforth too rashly on that guileful net,
        In which if ever ye entrapped are,
        Out of her bands ye by no means shall get.
    Fondness it were for any being free,
        To covet fetters, though they golden be.

XXXVIII

    Arion, when through tempests' cruel wrack,
        He forth was thrown into the greedy seas:
        Through the sweet music which his harp did make
        Allured a dolphin him from death to ease.
    But my rude music, which was wont to please
        Some dainty ears, cannot with any skill,
        The dreadful tempest of her wrath appease,
        Nor move the dolphin from her stubborn will.
    But in her pride she doth persever still,
        All careless how my life for her decays:
        Yet with one word she can in save or spill,
        To spill were pitty, but to save were praise.
    Choose rather to be praised for doing good,
        Than to be blam'd for spilling guiltless blood.

XXXIX

    Sweet smile, the daughter of the queen of love,
        Expressing all thy mother's powerful art:
        With which she wonts to temper angry Jove,
        When all the gods he threats with thund'ring dart.
    Sweet is thy virtue as thy self sweet art,
        For when on me thou shinedst late in sadness,
        A melting pleasance ran through every part,
        And me revived with heart robbing gladness.
    Whylest rapt with joy resembling heavenly madness,
        My soul was ravished quite as in a trance:
        And feeling thence no more her sorrow's sadness,
        Fed on the fullness of that cheerful glance,
    More sweet than nectar or ambrosial meat,
        Seemed every bit, which thenceforth I did eat.

XL

    Mark when she smiles with amiable cheer,
        And tell me whereto can ye liken it:
        When on each eyelid sweetly do appear
        An hundred Graces as in shade to sit.
    Likest it seemeth in my simple wit
        Unto the fair sunshine in summer's day:
        That when a dreadful storm away is flit,
        Through the broad world doth spread his goodly ray:
    At sight whereof each bird that sits on spray,
        And every beast that to his den was fled
        Comes forth afresh out of their late dismay,
        And to the light lift up their drooping head.
    So my storm-beaten heart likewise is cheered,
        With that sunshine when cloudy looks are cleared.

XLI

    Is it her nature or is it her will,
        To be so cruel to an humbled foe?
        If nature, then she may it mend with skill,
        If will, then she at will may will forgo.
    But if her nature and her will be so,
        that she will plague the man that loves her most:
        And take delight t'increase a wretch's woe,
        Then all her nature's goodly gifts are lost.
    And that same glorious beauty's idle boast,
        Is but a bait such wretches to beguile:
        As being long in her love's tempest tossed,
        She means at last to make her piteous spoil.
    Of fairest fair let never it be named,
        That so fair beauty was so foully shamed.

XLII

    The love which me so cruelly tormenteth,
        So pleasing is in my extremest pain:
        That all the more my sorrow it augmenteth,
        The more I love and do embrace my bane.
    Ne do I wish (for wishing were but vain)
        To be acquit from my continual smart:
        But joy her thrall for ever to remain,
        And yield for pledge my poor captived heart;
    The which that it from her may never start,
        Let her, if please her, bind with adamant chain:
        And from all wandering loves which mote pervert,
        His safe assurance strongly it restrain.
    Only let her abstain from cruelty,
        And do me not before my time to die.

XLIII

    Shall I then silent be or shall I speak?
        And if I speak, her wrath renew I shall:
        And if I silent be, my heart will break,
        Or choked be with overflowing gall.
    What tyranny is this both my heart to thrall,
        And eke my tongue with proud restraint to tie?
        That neither I may speak nor think at all,
        But like a stupid stock in silence die.
    Yet I my heart with silence secretly
        Will teach to speak, and my just cause to plead:
        And eke mine eyes with meek humility,
        Love-learned letters to her eyes to read.
    Which her deep wit, that true hearts' thought can spell,
        Will soon conceive, and learn to construe well.

XLIV

    When those renowned noble peers of Greece,
        Through stubborn pride amongst themselves did war,
        Forgetful of the famous golden fleece,
        Then Orpheus with his harp their strife did bar.
    But this continual cruel civil war
        The which myself against myself do make:
        Whilest my weak powers of passions warried are,
        No skill can stint nor reason can aslake.
    But when in hand my tuneless harp I take,
        Then do I more augment my foes' despight:
        And grief renew, and passions do awake
        To battle, fresh against myself to fight.
    'Mongst whom the more I seek to settle peace,
        The more I find their malice to increase.

XLV

    Leave, lady, in your glass of crystal clean,
        Your goodly self for evermore to view:
        And in myself, my inward self I mean,
        Most lively like behold your semblance true.
    Within my heart, though hardly it can shew
        Thing so divine to view of earthly eye,
        The fair Idea of your celestial hue,
        And every part remains immortally:
    And were it not that through your cruelty,
        With sorrow dimmed and deformed it were:
        The goodly image of your visnomy,
        Dearer than crystal would therein appear.
    But if yourself in me ye plain will see,
        Remove the cause by which your fair beams darkened be.

XLVI

    When my abode's prefixed time is spent,
        My cruel fair straight bids me wend my way:
        But then from heaven most hideous storms are sent
        As willing me against her will to stay.
    Whom then shall I or heaven or her obey?
        The heavens know best what is the best form:
        But as she will, whose will my life doth sway,
        My lower heaven, so it perforce must be.
    But ye high heavens, that all this sorrow see,
        Sith all your tempests cannot hold me back:
        Aswage your storms, or else both you and she,
        Will both together me too sorely wrack.
    Enough it is for one man to sustain
        The storms, which she alone on me doth rain.

XLVII

    Trust not the treason of those smiling looks,
        Until ye have their guilefull trains well tried;
        For they are like but unto golden hooks,
        That from the foolish fish their baits do hide:
    So she with flattering smiles weak hearts doth guide
        Unto her love, and tempt to their decay,
        Whom being caught she kills with cruel pride,
        And feeds at pleasure on the wretched pray:
    Yet even whilst her bloody hands them slay,
        Her eyes look lovely and upon them smile:
        That they take pleasure in her cruel play,
        And dying do themselves of pain beguile.
    O mighty charm which makes men love their bane,
        And think they die with pleasure, live with pain.

XLVIII

    Innocent paper, whom too cruel hand
        Did make the matter to avenge her ire:
        And ere she could thy cause well understand,
        Did sacrifice unto the greedy fire.
    Well worthy thou to have found better hire,
        Then so bad end for heretics ordained;
        Yet heresy nor treason didst conspire,
        But plead thy master's cause unjustly pained.
    Whom she all careless of his grief contrained
        To utter forth the anguish of his heart;
        And would not hear, when he to her complained,
        The piteous passion of his dying smart.
    Yet live for ever, though against her will,
        And speak her good, though she requite it ill.

XLIX

    Fair cruel, why are you so fierce and cruel?
        Is it because your eyes have power to kill?
        Then know, that mercy is the mightiest jewel,
        And greater glory think to save, than spill.
    But if it be your pleasure and proud will,
        To show the power of your imperious eyes:
        Then not on him that never thought you ill,
        But bend your force against your enemies.
    Let them feel th'utmost of your cruelties,
        And kill with looks, as Cockatrices do:
        But him that at your footstool humbled lies,
        With merciful regard, give mercy to.
    Such mercy shall you make admired to be,
        So shall you live by giving life to me.

L

    Long languishing in double malady,
        Of my heart's wound and of my body's grief,
        There came to me a leach that would apply
        Fit medicines for my body's best relief.
    Vain man (quoth I) that hast but little priefe
        In deep discovery of the mind's disease,
        Is not the heart of all the body chief?
        And rules the members as itself doth please.
    Then with some cordials seek first to appease
        The inward langour of my wounded heart,
        And then my body shall have shortly ease:
        But such sweet cordials pass physicians' art,
    Then my life's Leach do you your skill reveal,
        And with one salve both heart and body heal.

LI

    Do I not see that fairest images
        Of hardest marble are of purpose made?
        For that they should endure through many ages,
        Ne let their famous monuments to fade.
    Why then do I, untrained in lovers' trade,
        Her hardness blame which I should more commend?
        Sith never aught was excellect assayed,
        Which was not hard t'achieve and bring to end.
    Ne aught so hard, but he that would attend,
        Mote soften it and to his will allure:
        So do I hope her stubborn heart to bend,
        And that it then more steadfast will endure.
    Only my pains will be the more to get her,
        But having her, my joy will be the greater.

LII

    So oft as homeward I from her depart,
        I go like one that having lost the field,
        Is prisoner led away with heavy heart,
        Despoiled of warlike arms and knowen shield.
    So do I now myself a prisoner yield,
        To sorrow and to solitary pain:
        From presence of my dearest dear exiled,
        Longwhile alone in languor to remain.
    There let no thought of joy or pleasure vain,
        Dare to approach, that may my solace breed:
        But sudden dumps and dreary sad disdain,
        Of all worlds gladness more my torment feed.
    So I her absence will my penance make,
        That of her presence I my mead may take.

LIII

    The panther knowing that his spotted hide
        Doth please all beasts, but that his looks them fray,
        Within a bush his dreadful head doth hide,
        To let thm gaze whilst he on them may prey.
    Right so my cruel fair with me doth play,
        For with the goodly semblance of her hue
        She doth allure me to mine own decay,
        And then no mercy will unto me shew.
    Great shame it is, thing so divine in view,
        Made for to be the world's most ornament,
        To make the bait her gazers to enbrew,
        Good shames to be too ill an instrument.
    But mercy doth with beauty best agree,
        As in their maker ye them best may see.

LIV

    Of this world's theatre in which we stay,
        My love like the spectator idly sits
        Beholding me that all the pageants play,
        Disguising diversely my troubled wits.
    Sometimes I joy when glad occasion fits,
        And mask in mirth like to a comedy:
        Soon after when my joy to sorrow flits,
        I wail and make my woes a tragedy.
    Yet she beholding me with constant eye,
        Delights not in my mirth nor rues my smart:
        But when I laugh she mocks, and when I cry
        She laughs, and hardens evermore her heart.
    What then can move her? if not mirth nor moan,
        She is no woman, but senseless stone.

LV

    So oft as I her beauty do behold,
        And therewith do her cruelty compare,
        I marvel of what substance was the mould
        The which her made at once so cruel fair.
    Not earth; for her high thoughts more heavenly are,
        Not water; for her love doth burn like fire:
        Not air; for she is not so light or rare,
        Not fire; for she doth freeze with faint desire.
    Then needs another element inquire
        Whereof she mote be made; that is the sky.
        For to the heaven her haughty looks aspire:
        And eke her mind is pure immortal high.
    Then sith to heaven ye likened are the best,
        Be like in mercy as in all the rest.

LVI

    Fair ye be sure, but cruel and unkind,
        As is the tiger that with greediness
        Hunts after blood, when he by chance doth find
        A feeble beast, doth felly him oppress.
    Fair be ye sure, but proud and pityless,
        As is a storm, that all things doth prostrate:
        Finding a tree alone all comfortless,
        Beats on it strongly it to ruinate.
    Fair be ye sure, but hard and obstinate,
        As is a rock amidst the raging floods:
        'Gainst which a ship of succour desolate,
        Doth suffer wreck both of herself and goods.
    That ship, that tree, and that same beast am I,
        Whom ye do wreck, do ruin, and destroy.

LVII

    Sweet warrior, when shall I have peace with you?
        High time it is, this war now ended were:
        Which I no longer can endure to sue,
        Ne your incessant battery more to bear:
    So weak my powers, so sore my wounds appear
        That wonder is how I should live a jot,
        Seeing my heart through launched everywhere
        With thousand arrows, which your eyes have shot:
    Yet shoot ye sharply still, and spare me not,
        But glory think to make these cruel stoures.
        Ye cruel one, what glory can be got,
        In slaying him that would live gladly yours?
    Make peace therefore, and grant me timely grace,
        That all my wouds will heal in little space.

LVIII. By her that is most assured to herself.

    Weak is th'assurance that weak flesh reposeth
        In her own power, and scorneth others' aid:
        That soonest falls when as she most supposeth
        Herself assured, and is of nought afraid.
    All flesh is frail, and all her strength unstayed,
        Like a vain bubble blown up with air:
        Devouring time and changeful chance have preyed
        Her glory's pride that none may it repair.
    Ne none so rich or wise, so strong or fair,
        But faileth trusting on his own assurance:
        And he that standeth on the highest stair
        Falls lowest: for on earth nought hath endurence.
    Why then do ye proud fair, misdeem so far,
        That to yourself ye most assured are.

LIX

    Thrice happy she, that is so well assured
        Unto herself and settled so in heart:
        That neither will for better be allured,
        Ne feared with worse to any chance start:
    But like a steady ship doth strongly part
        The raging waves and keeps her course aright:
        Ne aught for tempest doth from it depart,
        Ne aught for fairer weather false delight.
    Such self assurance need not fear the spite
        Of grudging foes, ne favor seek of friends:
        But in the stay of her own steadfast might,
        Neither to one herself nor another bends.
    Most happy she that most assured doth rest,
        But he most happy who such one loves best.

LX

    They that in course of heavenly spheres are skilled,
        To every planet point his sundry year:
        In which her circle's voyage is fulfilled,
        As Mars in three-score years doth run his sphere.
    So since the winged God his planet clear,
        Began in me to move, one year is spent:
        The which doth longer unto me appear,
        Than all those forty which my life outwent.
    Then by that count, which lovers' books invent,
        The sphere of Cupid forty years contains:
        Which I have wasted in long languishment,
        That seemed the longer for my greater pains.
    But let my love's fair planet short her ways
        This year ensuing, or else short my days.

LXI

    The glorious image of the maker's beauty,
        My sovereign saint, the idol of my thought,
        Dare not henceforth above the bounds of duty
        T'accuse of pride, or rashly blame for aught.
    For being as she is divinely wrought,
        And of the brood of angels heavenly born;
        And with the crew of blessed saints upbrought,
        Each of which did her with their gifts adorn;
    The bud of joy, the blossom of the morn,
        The beam of light, whom mortal eyes admire:
        What reason is it then but she should scorn
        Base things, that to her love too bold aspire?
    Such heavenly forms ought rather worshipped be,
        Than dare be lov'd by men of mean degree.

LXII

    The weary year his race now having run,
        The new begins his compassed course anew:
        With shew of morning mild he hath begun,
        Betokening peace and plenty to ensue.
    So let us, which this change of weather view,
        Change each our minds and former lives amend,
        The old year's sins forepast let us eschew,
        And fly the faults with which we did offend.
    Then shall the new year's joy forth freshly send,
        Into the glooming world his gladsome ray:
        And all these storms which now his beauty blend,
        Shall turn to calms and timely clear away.
    So likewise love cheer you and your heavy sprite,
        And change old year's annoy to new delight.

:poem
LXIII

    After long storms and tempests' sad assay,
        Which hardly I endured heretofore:
        In dread of death and dangerous dismay,
        With which my silly bark was tossed sore:
    I do at length descry the happy shore,
        In which I hope ere long for to arrive;
        Fair soil it seems from far and fraught with store
        Of all that dear and dainty is alive.
    Most happy he that can at last achieve
        The joyous safety of so sweet a rest:
        Whose least delight sufficeth to deprive
        Remembrance of all pains which him oppressed.
    All pains are nothing in respect to this,
        All sorrows short that gain eternal bliss.

LXIV

    Coming to kiss her lips, (such grace I found)
        Me seemed I smelled a garden of sweet flowers,
        That dainty odors from them threw around
        For damsels fit to deck their lovers' bowers.
    Her lips did smell like unto Gillyflowers,
        Her ruddy cheeks like unto Roses red:
        Her snowy brows like budded Bellamores,
        Her lovely eyes like Pinks but newly spread.
    Her goodly bosom like a strawberry bed,
        Her neck like to a bunch of Columbines:
        Her breast like Lillies, ere their leaves be shed,
        Her nipples like young blossomed Jasmines.
    Such fragrant flowers do give most odorous smell,
        But her sweet odor did them all excel.

LXV

    The doubt which you misdeem, fair love, is vain,
        That fondly fear to lose your liberty,
        When losing one, two liberties you gain,
        And make him bond that bondage erst did fly.
    Sweet be the bands, the which true love doth tie,
        Without constraint or dread of any ill:
        The gentle bird feels no captivity
        Within her cage, but sings and feeds her fill.
    There pride dare not approach, nor discord spill
        The league 'twixt them, that loyal love hath bound:
        But simple truth and mutual good will,
        Seeks with sweet peace to salve each others' wound:
    There faith doth fearless dwell in brazen tower,
        And spotless pleasure builds her sacred bower.

LXVI

    To all those happy blissing which ye have,
        With plenteous hand by heaven upon you thrown,
        This one disparagement they to you gave,
        That ye your love lent to so mean a one.
    Yet whose high worths surpassing paragon,
        Could not on earth have found one fit for mate,
        Ne but in heaven matchable to none,
        Why did ye stoop unto so lowly state?
    But ye thereby much greater glory gate,
        Than had ye sorted with a prince's peer:
        For now your light doth more itself dilate,
        And in my darkness greater doth appear.
    Yet since your light hath once enlumined me,
        With my reflex yours shall increased be.

LXVII

    Like as a huntsman after weary chase,
        Seeing the game from him escaped away,
        Sits down to rest him in some shady place,
        With panting hounds beguiled of their pray:
    So after long pursuit and vain assay,
        When I all weary had the chase forsook,
        The gentle deer returned the self-same way,
        Thinking to quench her thirst at the next brook.
    There she beholding me with milder look,
        Sought not to fly, but fearless still did bide:
        Till I in hand her yet half-trembling took,
        And with her own goodwill here firmly tied.
    Strange thing me seemed to see a beast so wild,
        So goodly won with her own will beguiled.

LXVIII

    Most glorious Lord of life, that on this day,
        Didst make thy triumph over death and sin:
        And having harrowed hell, didst bring away
        Captivity thence captive us to win:
    This joyous day, dear Lord, with joy begin,
        And grant that we for whom thou didst die
        Being with thy dear blood clean washed from sin,
        May live for ever in felicity.
    And that thy love we weighing worthily,
        May likewise love thee for the same again:
        And for thy sake that all like dear didst buy,
        With love may one another entertain.
    So let us love, like as we ought,
        Love is the lesson which the Lord us taught.

LXIX

    The famous warriors of the antick world,
        Used trophies to erect in stately wise:
        In which they would the records have enrolled,
        Of their great deeds and valorous emprize.
    What trophy then shall I most fit devise,
        In which I may record the memory
        Of my love's conquest, peerless beauty's prize,
        Adorn'd with honour, love, and chastity.
    Even this verse vowed to eternity,
        Shall be thereof immortal monument:
        And tell her praise to all posterity,
        That may admire such world's rare wonderment.
    The happy purchase of my glorious spoil,
        Gotten at last with labour and long toil.

LXX

    Fresh spring the herald of love's might king,
        In whose coat-armor richly are displayed
        All sorts of flowers the which on earth do spring
        In goodly colors gloriously displayed.
    Go to my love, where she is careless laid,
        Yet in her winter's bower not well awake:
        Tell her the joyous time will not be staid
        Unless she do him by the forelock take.
    Bid her therefore herself soon ready make,
        To wait on love amongst his lovely crew:
        Where every one that misseth than her make,
        Shall be by him amearst with penance due.
    Make haste therefore sweet love, whilst it is prime,
        For none can call again the passed time.

LXXI

    I joy to see how in your drawen work,
        Yourself unto the bee ye do compare:
        And me unto the Spider that doth lurk,
        In close await to catch her unaware.
    Right so youself were caught in cunning snare
        Of a dear foe, and thralled to his love:
        In whose straight bands ye now captived are
        So firmly, that ye never may remove.
    But as your work is woven all above,
        With woodbine flowers and fragrant Eglantine;
        So sweet your prison you in time shall prove,
        With many dear delights bedecked fine.
    And all thenceforth eternal peace shall see,
        Between the spider and the gentle bee.

LXXII

    Oft when my spirit doth spread her bolder wings,
        In mind to mount up to the purest sky:
        It down is weighed with thought of earthly things
        And clogged with burden of mortality.
    Where when that sovereign beauty it doth spy,
        Resembling heaven's glory in her light:
        Drawn with sweet pleasure's bait, it back doth fly,
        And unto heaven forgets her former flight.
    There my frail fancy fed with full delight,
        Doth bathe in bliss and mantleth most at ease:
        Ne thinks of other heaven, but how it might
        Her heart's desire with most contentment please.
    Heart need not with none other happiness,
        But here on earth to have such heaven's bliss.

LXXIII

    Being myself captured here in care,
        My heart, whom none with servile bands can tie,
        But the fair tresses of your golden hair,
        Breaking his prison forth to you doth fly.
    Like as a bird that in one's hand doth spy
        Desired food, to it doth make his flight:
        Even so my heart, that wont on your fair eye
        To feed his fill, flys back unto your sight.
    Do you him take, and in your bosom bright,
        Gently encage, that he may be your thrall:
        Perhaps he there may learn with rare delight,
        To sing your name and praises over all.
    That it hereafter may you not repent,
        Him lodging in your bosom to have lent.

LXXIV

    Most happy letters fram'd by skillful trade,
        With which that happy name was first designed:
        The which three times thrice happy hath me made,
        With gifts of body, fortune and of mind.
    The first my being to me gave by kind,
        From mother's womb deriv'd by due descent,
        The second is my sovereign Queen most kind,
        That honour and large riches to me lent.
    The third my love, my life's last ornament,
        By whom my spirit out of dust was raised:
        To speak her praise and glory excellent,
        Of all alive most worthy to be praised.
    Ye three Elizabeths forever live,
        That three such graces did unto me give.

LXXV

    One day I wrote her name upon the strand,
        But came the waves and washed it away:
        Again I wrote it with a second hand,
        But came the tide, and made my pains his prey.
    Vain man, said she, that doest in vain assay,
        A mortal thing so to immortalize,
        For I myself shall like to this decay,
        And eek my name be wiped out likewise.
    No so, (quod I) let baser things devise
        To die in dust, but you shall live by fame:
        My verse, your virtues rare shall eternize,
        And in the heavens write your glorious name.
    Where whenas death shall all the world subdue,
        Out love shall live, and later life renew.

LXXVI

    Fair bosom fraught with virtue's riches treasure,
        The nest of love, the lodging of delight:
        The bower of bliss, the paradise of pleasure,
        The sacred harbour of that heavenly sprite.
    How was I ravished with your lovely sight,
        And my frail thoughts too rashly led astray?
        Whiles diving deep through amorous insight,
        On the sweet spoil of beauty they did prey.
    And twixt her paps like early fruit in May,
        Whose harvest seemed to hasten now apace:
        They loosly did their wanton wings display,
        And there to rest themselves did boldly place.
    Sweet thoughts I envy your so happy rest,
        Which oft I wished, yet never was so blest.

LXXVII

    Was it a dream, or did I see it plain,
        A goodly table of pure ivory:
        All spread with juncats, fit to entertain
        The greatest prince with pompous royalty.
    'Mongst which there in a silver dish did lie
        Two golden apples of unvalued price:
        Far passing those which Hercules came by,
        Or those which Atalanta did entice.
    Exceeding sweet, yet void of sinful vice,
        That many sought yet none could ever taste,
        Sweet fruit of pleasure brought from paradise
        By love himself, and in his garden placed.
    Her breast that table was so richly spread,
        My thoughts the guests, which would thereon have fed.

LXXVIII

    Lacking my love I go from place to place,
        Like a young fawn that late hath lost the hind:
        And seek each where, where last I saw her face,
        Whose image yet I carry fresh in mind.
    I seek the fields with her late footing signed,
        I seek her bower with her late presence decked,
        Yet nor in field nor bower I her can find:
        Yet field and bower are full of her aspect.
    But when mine eyes I thereunto direct,
        They idly back return to me again,
        And when I hope to see their true object,
        I find myself but fed with fancies vain.
    Cease then mine eyes, to seek herself to see,
        And let my thoughts behold herself in me.

LXXIX

    Men call you fair, and you do credit it,
        For that yourself ye daily such do see:
        But the true fair, that is the gentle wit,
        And virtuous mind, is much more prayed of me.
    For all the rest, how ever fair it be,
        Shall turn to naught and loose that glorious hue:
        But only that is permanent and free
        From frail corruption, that doth flesh ensue.
    That is true beauty: that doth argue you
        To be divine and born of heavenly seed:
        Deriv'd from that fair spirit, from whom all true
        And perfect beauty did at first proceed.
    He only fair, and what he fair hath made,
        All other fair like flowers untimely fade.

LXXX

    After so long a race as I have run
        Through Faery land, which those six books compile,
        Give leave to rest me being half fordone,
        And gather to myself new breath awhile.
    Then as a steed refreshed after toil,
        Out of my prison I will break anew:
        And stoutly will that second work assoyle,
        With strong endeavor and attention due.
    Till then give leave to me in pleasant mew,
        To sport my muse and sing my love's sweet praise:
        The contemplation of whose heavenly hue,
        My spirit to an higher pitch will raise.
    But let her praises yet be low and mean,
        Fit for the handmaid of the Faery Queene.

LXXXI

    Fair is my love, when her fair golden heares,
        With the loose wind ye waving chance to mark:
        Fair when the rose in her red cheeks appears,
        Or in her eyes the fire of love does spark.
    Fair when her breast like a rich-laden bark,
        With precious merchandise she forth doth lay:
        Fair when that cloud of pride, which oft doth dark
        Her goodly light with smiles she drives away.
    But fairest she, when so she doth display,
        The gate with pearls and rubies richly dight:
        Through which her words so wise do make their way
        To bear the message of her gentle sprite.
    The rest be works of nature's wonderment,
        But this the work of heart's astonishment.

LXXXII

    Joy of my life, full oft for loving you
        I bless my lot, that was so lucky placed:
        But then the more your own mishap I rue,
        That are so much by so mean love debased.
    For had the equal heavens so much you graced
        In this as in the rest, ye mote invent
        Soom heavenly wit, whose verse could have enchased
        Your glorious name in golden monument.
    But since ye deigned so goodly to relent
        To me your thrall, in whom is little worth,
        That little that I am, shall all be spent,
        In setting your immoral praises forth.
    Whose lofty argument uplifting me,
        Shall lift you up unto an high degree.

LXXXIII

    My hungry eyes, through greedy covetize,
        Still to behold the object of their pain:
        With no contentment can themselves suffice.
        But having pine, and having not complain.
    For lacking it, they cannot life sustain,
        And seeing it, they gaze on it the more:
        In their amazement like Narcissus vain
        Whose eyes him starv'd: so plenty makes me poor.
    Yet are mine eyes so filled with the store
        Of that fair sight, that nothing else they brook:
        But loath the things which they did like before,
        And can no more endure on them to look.
    All this world's glory seemeth vain to me,
        And all their shows but shadows, saving she.

LXXXIV

    Let not one spark of filthy lustfull fire
        Ne one light glance of sensual desire
        Attempt to work her gentle mind's unrest.
    But pure affections bred in spotless breast,
        And modest thoughts breathed from well tempered sprites
        Go visit her in her chaste bower of rest,
        Accompanied with angelic delights.
    There fill yourself with those most joyous sights,
        The which myself could never yet attain:
        But speak no word to her of these sad plights,
        Which her too constant stiffness doth constrain.
    Only behold her rare perfection,
        And bless your fortune's fair election.

LXXXV

    The world that cannot deem of worthy things,
        When I do praise her, say I do but flatter:
        So does the cuckoo, when the mavis sings,
        Begin his witless note apace to clatter.
    But they that skill not of so heavenly matter,
        All that they know not, envy or admire,
        Rather than envy let them wonder at her,
        But not to deem of her desert aspire.
    Deep in the closet of my parts entire,
        Her worth is written with a golden quill:
        That me with heavenly fury doth inspire,
        And my glad mouth with her sweet praises fill.
    Which when as fame in her shrill trump shall thunder
        Let the world choose to envy or to wonder.

LXXXVI

    Venemous tongue, tipped with vile adders' sting,
        Of that self kind with which the Furies fell
        Their snaky heads do comb, from which a spring
        Of poisoned words and spiteful speeches well.
    Let all the plagues and horrid pains of hell,
        Upon thee fall for thine accursed hire:
        That with false-forged lies, which thou didst tell,
        In my true love did stir up coals of ire,
    The sparks whereof let kindle thine own fire,
        And catching hold on thine own wicked head
        Consume thee quite, that didst with guile conspire
        In my sweet peace such breaches to have bred.
    Shame be thy meed, and mischief thy reward,
        Due to thyself that it for me prepared.

LXXXVII

    Since I did leave the presence of my love,
        Many long weary days have I outworn:
        And many nights, that slowly seemed to move
        Their sad protract from evening until morn.
    For when as day the heaven doth adorn,
        I wish that night the noyous day would end:
        And when as night hath us of light forlorn,
        I wish that day would shortly reascend.
    Thus I the time with expectation spend,
        And fain my grief with changes to beguile,
        That further seems his term still to extend,
        And maketh every minute seem a mile.
    So sorrow still doth seem too long to last,
        But joyous hours do fly away too fast.

LXXXVIII

    Since I have lacked the comfort of that light,
        The which was wont to lead my thoughts astray:
        I wander as in darkness of the night,
        Afraid of every danger's least dismay.
    Ne ought I see, though in the clearest day,
        When others gaze upon their shadows vain:
        But th'only image of that heavenly ray,
        Whereof some glance doth in mine eye remain.
    Of which beholding the idea plain,
        Through contemplation of my purest part:
        With light thereof I do myself sustain,
        And thereon feed my love-afamished heart.
    But with such brightness whilst I fill my mind,
        I starve my body and mine eyes do blind.

LXXXIX

    Like as the culver on the bared bough,
        Sits mourning for the absence of her mate,
        And in her songs sends many a wishful vow,
        For his return that seems to linger late.
    So I alone now left disconsolate,
        Mourn to myself the absence of my love:
        And wandering here and there all desolate,
        Seek with my plaints to match that mournful dove:
    Ne joy of aught that under heaven doth hove,
        Can comfort me, but her own joyous sight:
        Whose sweet aspect both God and man can move,
        In her unspotted pleasauns to delight.
    Dark is my day, while her fair light I miss,
        And dead my life that wants such lively bliss.


here in this valley of discrete academies
we have not mountains, but mounts, truncated hillocks
to the adirondacks, to northern monadnock,
themselves mere rocky hillocks to an everest
still, theyre out best mustering of height by
comparison with the sunnken silver-grizzled
back of the connecticut, the river-level
flats of hadley farms, theyre lofty enough
elevations to be called something more than hills
green, wholly green, they stand their knobby spine
against our sky they are what we look southward to
up pleasant street at main poising their shapes
between the snuff and red tar-paper apartments,
they mound a summer coolness in our view
to people who live in the bottom of valleys
a rise in the landscape, hummock or hogback, looks
to be meant for climbing a peculiar logic
in going up for the coming down if the post
we start ats the same post we finish by,
but its the clear conversion at the top can hold
us to the oblique road, in spite of a fitful
wish for even ground, and its the last cliff
ledge will dislodge out cramped concept of space, unwall
horizons beyond vision, spill vision
after the horizons, stretching the narrowed eye
to full capacity we climb to hopes
of such seeing up the leaf-shuttered escarpments,
blindered by green, under a green-grained sky
into the blue tops define themselves as places
where nothing highers to be looked to downward looks
follow the black arrow-backs of swifts on their track
of the air eddies loop and arc though airs at rest
to us, since we see no leaf edge stir high
here on a mount overlaid with leaves the paint-peeled
hundred-year-old hotel sustains its ramshackle
four-way veranda, view-keeping above
the fallen timbers of its once remarkable
funicular railway, witness to gone
time, and to graces gone with the time a state view-
keeper collects half-dollars for the slopes
of state scenery, sells soda, shows off viewpoints
a ruffy skylight oaints the gray oxbow
and paints the rivers pale circumfluent stillness
as roses broach their carmine in a mirror flux
of the desultory currents --- all that unique
stripple of shifting wave-tips is ironed out, lost
in the simplified orderings of sky-
lorded perspectives maplike, the far fields are ruled
by correct green lines and no seedy free-for-all
of asparagus heads cars run their suave
colored beads on the strung roads, and the people stroll
straightforwardly across the springing green
alls peace and discipline down there till lately we
lived under the shadow of hot rooftops
and never saw how coolly we might move for once
a high hush quietens the crickets cry
the smile of iceboxes annihilates me
such blue currents in the veins of my loved one
i hear her great heart purr
from her lips ampersands and percent signs
exit like kisses
it is monday in her mind morals
launder and present themselves
what am i to make of these contradictions?
i wear white cuffs, i bow
is this love then, this red material
issuing from the steele needle that flies so blindingly?
it will make little dresses and coats,
it will cover a dynasty
how her body opens and shuts-
a swiss watch, jeweled in the hinges
o heart, such disorganization
the stars are flashing like terrible numerals
abc, her eyelids say
spry, wry, and gray as these march sticks,
percy bows, in his blue peajacket, among the narcissi
he is recuperating from something on the lung
the narcissi, too, are bowing to some big thing
it rattles their stars on the green hill where percy
nurses the hardship of his stitches, and walks and walks
there is a dignity to this there is a formality-
the flowers vivid as bandages, and the man mending
they bow and stand  they suffer such attacks
and the octogenarian loves the little flocks
he is quite blue the terrible wind tries his breathing
the narcissi look up like children, quickly and whitely
clocks cry stillness is a lie, my dear
the wheels revolve, the universe keeps running
proud you halt upon the spiral stair
the asteroids turn traitor in the air,
and planets plot with old elliptic cunning
clocks cry stillness is a lie, my dear
red the unraveled rose sings in your hair
blood springs eternal if the heart be burning
proud you halt upon the spiral stair
cryptic stars wind up the atmosphere,
in solar schemes the titled suns go turning
clocks cry stillness is a lie, my dear
loud the immortal nightingales declare
love flames forever if the flesh be yearning
proud you halt upon the spiral stair
circling zodiac compels the year
intolerant beauty never will be learning
clocks cry stillness is a lie, my dear
proud you halt upon the spiral stair
love set you going like a fat gold watch
the midwife slapped your footsoles, and your bald cry
took its place among the elements
our voices echo, magnifying your arrival  new statue
in a drafty museum, your nakedness
shadows our safety  we stand round blankly as walls
im no more your mother
than the cloud that distills a mirror to reflect its own slow
effacement at the winds hand
all night your moth-breath
flickers among the flat pink roses  i wake to listen
a far sea moves in my ear
one cry, and i stumble from bed, cow-heavy and floral
in my victorian nightgown
your mouth opens clean as a cats  the window square
whitens and swallows its dull stars  and now you try
your handful of notes
the clear vowels rise like balloons
old man, you surface seldom
then you come in with the tides
coming
when seas wash cold, foam-
capped white hair, white beard,
far-flung,
a dragnet, rising, falling, as waves
crest and trough miles long
extend the radial sheaves
of your spread hair, in which wrin-
kling skeins
knotted, caught, survives
the old myth of orgins
unimaginable you float near
as kneeled ice-mountains
of the north, to be steered clear
of, not fathomed all obscurity
starts with a danger
your dangers are many i
cannot look much but your form
suffers
some strange injury
and seems to die so vapors
ravel to clearness on the dawn sea
the muddy rumors
of your burial move me
to half-believe your reappearance
proves rumors shallow,
for the archaic trenched lines
of your grained face shed time in
runnels
ages beat like rains
on the unbeaten channels
of the ocean such sage humor
and
durance are whirlpools
to make away with the ground-
work of the earth and the skys
ridgepole
waist down, you may wind
one labyrinthine tangle
to root deep among knuckles, shin-
bones,
skulls inscrutable,
below shoulders not once
seen by any man who kept his head,
you defy questions
you defy godhood
i walk dry on your kingdoms border
exiled to no good
your shelled bed i remember
father, this thick air is murderous
i would breathe water
arena dust rusted by four bulls blood to a dull redness,
the afternoon at a bad end under the crowds truculence,
the ritual death each time botched among dropped capes, ill-judged
stabs,
the strongest will seemed a will towards ceremony obese, dark-
faced in his rich yellows, tassels, pompons, braid, the picador
rode out against the fifth bull to brace his pike and slowly bear
down deep into the bent bull-neck cumbrous routine, not artwork
instinct for art began with the bulls horn lofting in the mobs
hush a lumped man-shape the whole act formal, fluent as a dance
blood faultlessly broached redeemed the sullied air, the earths grossness
now coldness comes sifting down, layer after layer,
to our bower at the lily root
overhead the old umbrellas of summer
wither like pithless hands there is little shelter
hourly the eye of the sky enlarges its blank
dominion the stars are no nearer
already frog-mouth and fish-mouth drink
the liquor of indolence, and all thing sink
into a soft caul of forgetfulness
the fugitive colors die
caddis worms drowse in their silk cases,
the lamp-headed nymphs are nodding to sleep like statues
puppets, loosed from the strings of the puppetmaster
wear masks of horn to bed
this is not death, it is something safer
the wingy myths wont tug at us anymore
the molts are tongueless that sang from above the water
of golgotha at the tip of a reed,
and how a god flimsy as a babys finger
shall unhusk himself and steer into the air
he, hunger-strung, hard to slake,
so fitted is for my black luck
with heat such as no man could have
and yet keep kind
that all merits in being meat
seasoned how hed most approve
bloods broth
filched by his hand,
choice wassail makes, cooked hot,
cupped quick to mouth
though prime parts cram each rich meal,
hell not spare
nor scant his want until
sacked larders gone bone-bare
all day she plays at chess with the bones of the world
favored while suddenly the rains begin
beyond the window she lies on cushions curled
and nibbles an occasional bonbon of sin
prim, pink-breasted, feminine, she nurses
chocolate fancies in rose-papered rooms
where polished higboys whisper creaking curses
and hothouse roses shed immortal blooms
the garnets on her fingers twinkle quick
and blood reflects across the manuscript
she muses on the odor, sweet and sick,
of festering gardenias in a crypt,
and lost in subtle metaphor, retreats
from gray child faces crying in the streets
mother, mother, what illbred aunt
or what disfigured and unsightly
cousin did you so unwisely keep
unasked to my christening, that she
sent these ladies in her stead
with heads like darning-eggs to nod
and nod and nod at foot and head
and at the left side of my crib?
mother, who made to order stories
of mixie blackshort the heroic bear,
mother, whose witches always, always,
got baked into gingerbread, i wonder
whether you saw them, whether you said
words to rid me of those three ladies
nodding by night around my bed,
mouthless, eyeless, with stitched bald head
in the hurricane, when fathers twelve
study windows bellied in
like bubbles about to break, you fed
my brother and me cookies and ovaltine
and helped the two of us to choir
thor is angry boom boom boom
thor is angry we dont care
but those ladies broke the panes
when on tiptoe the schoolgirls danced,
blinking flashlights like fireflies
and singing the glowworm song, i could
not lift a foot in the twinkle-dress
but, heavy-footed, stood aside
in the shadow cast by my dismal-headed
godmothers, and you cried and cried
and the shadow stretched, the lights went out
mother, you sent me to piano lessons
and praised my arabesques and trills
although each teacher found my touch
oddly wooden in spite of scales
and the hours of practicing, my ear
tone-deaf and yes, unteachable
i learned, i learned, i learned elsewhere,
from muses unhired by you, dear mother,
i woke one day to see you, mother,
floating above me in bluest air
on a green balloon bright with a million
flowers and bluebirds that never were
never, never, found anywhere
but the little planet bobbed away
like a soap-bubble as you called come here
and i faced my traveling companions
day now, night now, at head, side, feet,
they stand their vigil in gowns of stone,
faces blank as the day i was born,
their shadows long in the setting sun
that never brightens or goes down
and this is the kingdom you bore me to,
mother, mother but no frown of mine
will betray the company i keep
how far is it?
how far is it now?
the gigantic gorilla interior
of the wheels move, they appall me ---
the terrible brains
of krupp, black muzzles
revolving, the sound
punching out absence like cannon
it is russia i have to get across, it is some was or other
i am dragging my body
quietly through the straw of the boxcars
now is the time for bribery
what do wheels eat, these wheels
fixed to their arcs like gods,
the silver leash of the will ----
inexorable and their pride
all the gods know destinations
i am a letter in this slot
i fly to a name, two eyes
will there be fire, will there be bread?
here there is such mud
it is a trainstop, the nurses
undergoing the faucet water, its veils, veils in a nunnery,
touching their wounded,
the men the blood still pumps forward,
legs, arms piled outside
the tent of unending cries ----
a hospital of dolls
and the men, what is left of the men
pumped ahead by these pistons, this blood
into the next mile,
the next hour ----
dynasty of broken arrows
how far is it?
there is mud on my feet,
thick, red and slipping it is adams side,
this earth i rise from, and i in agony
i cannot undo myself, and the train is steaming
steaming and breathing, its teeth
ready to roll, like a devils
there is a minute at the end of it
a minute, a dewdrop
how far is it?
it is so small
the place i am getting to, why are there these obstacles ----
the body of this woman,
charred skirts and deathmask
mourned by religious figures, by garlanded children
and now detonations ----
thunder and guns
the fires between us
is there no place
turning and turning in the middle air,
untouchable and untouchable
the train is dragging itself, it is screaming ----
an animal
insane for the destination,
the bloodspot,
the face at the end of the flare
i shall bury the wounded like pupas,
i shall count and bury the dead
let their souls writhe in like dew,
incense in my track
the carriages rock, they are cradles
and i, stepping from this skin
of old bandages, boredoms, old faces
step up to you from the black car of lethe,
pure as a baby
this is a dark house, very big
i made it myself,
cell by cell from a quiet corner,
chewing at the grey paper,
oozing the glue drops,
whistling, wiggling my ears,
thinking of something else
it has so many cellars,
such eelish delvings
u an round as an owl,
i see by my own light
any day i may litter puppies
or mother a horse my belly moves
i must make more maps
these marrowy tunnels
moley-handed, i eat my way
all-mouth licks up the bushes
and the pots of meat
he lives in an old well,
a stoney hole hes to blame
hes a fat sort
pebble smells, turnipy chambers
small nostrils are breathing
little humble loves
footlings, boneless as noses,
it is warm and tolerable
in the bowel of the root
heres a cuddly mother
always in the middle of a kiss
came the profane stimulus to cough
always from teh pulpit during service
leaned the devil prompting you to laugh
behind mock-ceremony of your grief
lurked the burlesque instinct of the ham
you never altered your amused belief
that life was a mere monumental sham
from the comic accident of birth
to the final grotesque joke of death
your malady of sacrilegious mirth
spread gay contagion with each clever breath
now you must play the straight man for a term
and tolerate the humor of the worm
now we, returning from the vaulted domes
of our colossal sleep, come home to find
a tall metropolis of catacombs
erected down the gangways of our mind
green alleys where we reveled have become
the infernal haunt of demon dangers
both seraph song and violins are dumb
each clock tick consecrates the death of strangers
backward we traveled to reclaim the day
before we fell, like icarus, undone
all we find are altars in decay
and profane words scrawled black across the sun
still, stubbornly we try to crack the nut
in which the riddle of our race is shut
outside in the street i hear
a car door slam voices coming near
incoherent scraps of talk
and high heels clicking up the walk
the doorbell rends the noonday heat
with copper claws
a seconds pause
the dull drums of my pulses beat
against a silence wearing thin
the door now opens from within
oh, hear the clash of people meeting ---
the laughter and the screams of greeting
fat always, and out of breath,
a greasy smack on every cheek
from aunt elizabeth
there, thats the pink, pleased squeak
of cousin jane, out spinster with
the faded eyes
and hands like nervous butterflies
while rough as splintered wood
across them all
rasps the jarring baritone of uncle paul
the youngest nephew gives a fretful whine
and drools at the reception line
like a diver on a lofty spar of land
atop the flight of stairs i stand
a whirlpool leers at me,
i cast off my identity
and make the fatal plunge
the day you died i went into the dirt,
into the lightless hibernaculum
where bees, striped black and gold, sleep out the blizzard
like hieratic stones, and the ground is hard
it was good for twenty years, that wintering -
as if you never existed, as if i came
god-fathered into the world from my mothers belly
her wide bed wore the stain of divinity
i had nothing to do with guilt or anything
when i wormed back under my mothers heart
small as a doll in my dress of innocence
i lay dreaming your epic, image by image
nobody died or withered on that stage
everything took place in a durable whiteness
the day i woke, i woke on churchyard hill
i found your name, i found your bones and all
enlisted in a cramped stone askew by an iron fence
in this charity ward, this poorhouse, where the dead
crowd foot to foot, head to head, no flower
breaks the soil this is azalea path
a field of burdock opens to the south
six feet of yellow gravel cover you
the artificial red sage does not stir
in the basket of plastic evergreens they put
at the headstone next to yours, nor does it rot,
although the rains dissolve a bloody dye
the ersatz petals drip, and they drip red
another kind of redness bothers me
the day your slack sail drank my sisters breath
the flat sea purpled like that evil cloth
my mother unrolled at your last homecoming
i borrow the silts of an old tragedy
the truth is, one late october, at my birth-cry
a scorpion stung its head, an ill-starred thing
my mother dreamed you face down in the sea
the stony actors poise and pause for breath
i brought my love to bear, and then you died
it was the gangrene ate you to the bone
my mother said you died like any man
how shall i age into that state of mind?
i am the ghost of an infamous suicide,
my own blue razor rusting at my throat
o pardon the one who knocks for pardon at
your gate, father - your hound-bitch, daughter, friend
it was my love that did us both to death
how the elements solidify ---
the moonlight, that chalk cliff
in whose rift we lie
back to back i here an owl cry
from its cold indigo
intolerable vowels enter my heart
the child in the white crib revolves and sighs,
opens its mouth now, demanding
his little face is carved in pained, red wood
then there are the stars - ineradicable, hard
one touch  it burns and sickens
i cannot see your eyes
where apple bloom ices the night
i walk in a ring,
a groove of old faults, deep and bitter
love cannot come here
a black gap discloses itself
on the opposite lip
a small white soul is waving, a small white maggot
my limbs, also, have left me
who has dismembered us?
the dark is melting we touch like cripples
what a thrill ---
my thumb instead of an onion
the top quite gone
except for a sort of a hinge
of skin,
a flap like a hat,
dead white
then that red plush
little pilgrim,
the indians axed your scalp
your turkey wattle
carpet rolls
straight from the heart
i step on it,
clutching my bottle
of pink fizz
a celebration, this is
out of a gap
a million soldiers run,
redcoats, every one
whose side are they on?
o my
homunculus, i am ill
i have taken a pill to kill
the thin
papery feeling
saboteur,
kamikaze man ---
the stain on your
gauze ku klux klan
babushka
darkens and tarnishes and when
the balled
pulp of your heart
confronts its small
mill of silence
how you jump ---
trepanned veteran,
dirty girl,
thumb stump
in benidorm there are melons,
whole donkey-carts full
of innumerable melons,
ovals and balls,
bright green and thumpable
laced over with stripes
of turtle-dark green
chooose an egg-shape, a world-shape,
bowl one homeward to taste
in the whitehot noon
cream-smooth honeydews,
pink-pulped whoppers,
bump-rinded cantaloupes
with orange cores
each wedge wears a studding
of blanched seeds or black seeds
to strew like confetti
under the feet of
this market of melon-eating
fiesta-goers
gold mouths cry with the green young
certainty of the bronze boy
remembering a thousand autumns
and how a hundred thousand leaves
came sliding down his shoulder blades
persuaded by his bronze heroic reason
we ignore the coming doom of gold
and we are glad in this bright metal season
even the dead laugh among the goldenrod
the bronze boy stands kneedeep in centuries,
and never grieves,
remembering a thousand autumns,
with sunlight of a thousand years upon his lips
and his eyes gone blind with leaves
thou shalt have an everlasting
monday and stand in the moon
the moons man stands in his shell,
bent under a bundle
of sticks the light falls chalk and cold
upon our bedspread
his teeth are chattering among the leprous
peaks and craters of those extinct volcanoes
he also against black frost
would pick sticks, would not rest
until his own lit room outshone
sundays ghost of sun
now works his hell of mondays in the moons ball,
fireless, seven chill seas chained to his ankle
i have done it again
one year in every ten
i manage it--
a sort of walking miracle, my skin
bright as a nazi lampshade,
my right foot
a paperweight,
my face featureless, fine
jew linen
peel off the napkin
o my enemy
do i terrify?--
the nose, the eye pits, the full set of teeth?
the sour breath
will vanish in a day
soon, soon the flesh
the grave cave ate will be
at home on me
and i a smiling woman
i am only thirty
and like the cat i have nine times to die
this is number three
what a trash
to annihilate each decade
what a million filaments
the peanut-crunching crowd
shoves in to see
them unwrap me hand and foot--
the big strip tease
gentlemen, ladies
these are my hands
my knees
i may be skin and bone,
nevertheless, i am the same, identical woman
the first time it happened i was ten
it was an accident
the second time i meant
to last it out and not come back at all
i rocked shut
as a seashell
they had to call and call
and pick the worms off me like sticky pearls
dying
is an art, like everything else
i do it exceptionally well
i do it so it feels like hell
i do it so it feels real
i guess you could say ive a call
its easy enough to do it in a cell
its easy enough to do it and stay put
its the theatrical
comeback in broad day
to the same place, the same face, the same brute
amused shout
a miracle
that knocks me out
there is a charge
for the eyeing of my scars, there is a charge
for the hearing of my heart--
it really goes
and there is a charge, a very large charge
for a word or a touch
or a bit of blood
or a piece of my hair or my clothes
so, so, herr doktor
so, herr enemy
i am your opus,
i am your valuable,
the pure gold baby
that melts to a shriek
i turn and burn
do not think i underestimate your great concern
ash, ash--
you poke and stir
flesh, bone, there is nothing there--
a cake of soap,
a wedding ring,
a gold filling
herr god, herr lucifer
beware
beware
out of the ash
i rise with my red hair
and i eat men like air
viciousness in the kitchen
the potatoes hiss
it is all hollywood, windowless,
the fluorescent light wincing on and off like a terrible migraine,
coy paper strips for doors
stage curtains, a widows frizz
and i, love, am a pathological liar,
and my child look at her, face down on the floor,
little unstrung puppet, kicking to disappear
why she is schizophrenic,
her face is red and white, a panic,
you have stuck her kittens outside your window
in a sort of cement well
where they crap and puke and cry and she cant hear
you say you cant stand her,
the bastards a girl
you who have blown your tubes like a bad radio
clear of voices and history, the staticky
noise of the new
you say i should drown the kittens their smell
you say i should drown my girl
shell cut her throat at ten if shes mad at two
the baby smiles, fat snail,
from the polished lozenges of orange linoleum
you could eat him hes a boy
you say your husband is just no good to you
his jew-mama guards his sweet sex like a pearl
you have one baby, i have two
i should sit on a rock off cornwall and comb my hair
i should wear tiger pants, i should have an affair
we should meet in another life, we should meet in air,
me and you
meanwhile theres a stink of fat and baby crap
im doped and thick from my last sleeping pill
the smog of cooking, the smog of hell
floats our heads, two venemous opposites,
our bones, our hair
i call you orphan, orphan you are ill
the sun gives you ulcers, the wind gives you tb
once you were beautiful
in new york, in hollywood, the men said through?
gee baby, you are rare
you acted, acted for the thrill
the impotent husband slumps out for a coffee
i try to keep him in,
an old pole for the lightning,
the acid baths, the skyfuls off of you
he lumps it down the plastic cobbled hill,
flogged trolley the sparks are blue
the blue sparks spill,
splitting like quartz into a million bits
o jewel o valuable
that night the moon
dragged its blood bag, sick
animal
up over the harbor lights
and then grew normal,
hard and apart and white
the scale-sheen on the sand scared me to death
we kept picking up handfuls, loving it,
working it like dough, a mulatto body,
the silk grits
a dog picked up your doggy husband he went on
now i am silent, hate
up to my neck,
thick, thick
i do not speak
i am packing the hard potatoes like good clothes,
i am packing the babies,
i am packing the sick cats
o vase of acid,
it is love you are full of you know who you hate
he is hugging his ball and chain down by the gate
that opens to the sea
where it drives in, white and black,
then spews it back
every day you fill him with soul-stuff, like a pitcher
you are so exhausted
your voice my ear-ring,
flapping and sucking, blood-loving bat
that is that that is that
you peer from the door,
sad hag every womans a whore
i cant communicate
i see your cute decor
close on you like the fist of a baby
or an anemone, that sea
sweetheart, that kleptomaniac
i am still raw
i say i may be back
you know what lies are for
even in your zen heaven we shant meet
this man makes a pseudonym
and crawls behind it like a worm
this woman on the telephone
says she is a man, not a woman
the mask increases, eats the worm,
stripes for mouth and eyes and nose,
the voice of the woman hollows---
more and more like a dead one,
worms in the glottal stops
she hates
the thought of a baby---
stealer of cells, stealer of beauty---
she would rather be dead than fat,
dead and perfect, like nefertit,
hearing the fierce mask magnify
the silver limbo of each eye
where the child can never swim,
where there is only him and him
pocket watch, i tick well
the streets are lizardy crevices
sheer-sided, with holes where to hide
it is best to meet in a cul-de-sac,
a palace of velvet
with windows of mirrors
there one is safe,
there are no family photographs,
no rings through the nose, no cries
bright fish hooks, the smiles of women
gulp at my bulk
and i, in my snazzy blacks,
mill a litter of breasts like jellyfish
to nourish
the cellos of moans i eat eggs -
eggs and fish, the essentials,
the aphrodisiac squid
my mouth sags,
the mouth of christ
when my engine reaches the end of it
the tattle of my
gold joints, my way of turning
bitches to ripples of silver
rolls out a carpet, a hush
and there is no end, no end of it
i shall never grow old new oysters
shriek in the sea and i
glitter like fontainebleau
gratified,
all the fall of water and eye
over whose pool i tenderly
lean and see me
we came over the moor-top
through air streaming and green-lit,
stone farms foundering in it,
valleys of grass altering
in a light neither dawn
nor nightfall, out hands, faces
lucent as percelain, the earths
claim and weight gone out of them
some such transfiguring moved
the eight pilgrims towards its source--
toward the great jewel shown often,
never given hidden, yet
simultaneously seen
on moor-top, at sea-bottom,
knowable only by light
other than noon, that moon, stars ---
the once-known way becoming
wholly other, and ourselves
estranged, changed, suspended where
angels are rumored, clearly
floating , among the floating
tables and chairs gravitys
lost in the lift and drift of
an easier element
than earth, and there is nothing
so fine we cannot do it
but nearing means distancing
at the common homecoming
light withdraws chairs, tables drop
down the body weighs like stone
it is no night to drown in
a full moon, river lapsing
black beneath bland mirror-sheen,
the blue water-mists dropping
scrim after scrim like fishnets
though fishermen are sleeping,
the massive castle turrets
doubling themselves in a glass
all stillness yet these shapes float
up toward me, troubling the face
of quiet from the nadir
they rise, their limbs ponderous
with richness, hair heavier
than sculptured marble they sing
of a world more full and clear
than can be sisters, your song
bears a burden too weighty
for the whorled ears listening
here, in a well-steered country,
under a balanced ruler
deranging by harmony
beyond the mundane order,
your voices lay siege you lodge
on the pitched reefs of nightmare,
promising sure harborage
by day, descant from borders
of hebetude, from the ledge
also of high windows worse
even than your maddening
song, your silence at the source
of your ice-hearted calling-
drunkenness of the great depths
o river, i see drifting
deep in your flux of silver
those great goddesses of peace
stone, stone, ferry me down there
kindness glides about my house
dame kindness, she is so nice
the blue and red jewels of her rings smoke
in the windows, the mirrors
are filling with smiles
what is so real as the cry of a child?
a rabbits cry may be wilder
but it has no soul
sugar can cure everything, so kindness says
sugar is a necessary fluid,
its crystals a little poultice
o kindness, kindness
sweetly picking up pieces
my japanese silks, desperate butterflies,
may be pinned any minute, anesthetized
and here you come, with a cup of tea
wreathed in steam
the blood jet is poetry,
there is no stopping it
you hand me two children, two roses
a villanelle
the sting of bees took away my father
who walked in a swarming shroud of wings
and scorned the tick of the falling weather
lightning licked in a yellow lather
but missed the mark with snaking fangs
the sting of bees too away my father
trouncing the sea like a ragin bather,
he rode the flood in a pride of prongs
and scorned the tick of the falling weather
a scowl of sun struck down my mother,
tolling her grave with golden gongs,
but the sting of bees took away my father
he counted the guns of god a bother,
laughed at the ambush of angels tongues,
and scorned the tick of the falling weather
o ransack the four winds and find another
man who can mangle the grin of kings
the sting of bees took away my father
who scorned the tick of the falling weather
the night is only a sort of carbon paper,
blueblack, with the much-poked periods of stars
letting in the light, peephole after peephole ---
a bonewhite light, like death, behind all things
under the eyes of the stars and the moons rictus
he suffers his desert pillow, sleeplessness
stretching its fine, irritating sand in all directions
over and over the old, granular movie
exposes embarrassments--the mizzling days
of childhood and adolescence, sticky with dreams,
parental faces on tall stalks, alternately stern and tearful,
a garden of buggy rose that made him cry
his forehead is bumpy as a sack of rocks
memories jostle each other for face-room like obsolete film stars
he is immune to pills red, purple, blue ---
how they lit the tedium of the protracted evening
those sugary planets whose influence won for him
a life baptized in no-life for a while,
and the sweet, drugged waking of a forgetful baby
now the pills are worn-out and silly, like classical gods
their poppy-sleepy colors do him no good
his head is a little interior of grey mirrors
each gesture flees immediately down an alley
of diminishing perspectives, and its significance
drains like water out the hole at the far end
he lives without privacy in a lidless room,
the bald slots of his eyes stiffened wide-open
on the incessant heat-lightning flicker of situations
nightlong, in the granite yard, invisible cats
have been howling like women, or damaged instruments
already he can feel daylight, his white disease,
creeping up with her hatful of trivial repetitions
the city is a map of cheerful twitters now,
and everywhere people, eyes mica-silver and blank,
are riding to work in rows, as if recently brainwashed
but i would rather be horizontal
i am not a tree with my root in the soil
sucking up minerals and motherly love
so that each march i may gleam into leaf,
nor am i the beauty of a garden bed
attracting my share of ahs and spectacularly painted,
unknowing i must soon unpetal
compared with me, a tree is immortal
and a flower-head not tall, but more startling,
and i want the ones longevity and the others daring
tonight, in the infinitesimallight of the stars,
the trees and the flowers have been strewing their cool odors
i walk among them, but none of them are noticing
sometimes i think that when i am sleeping
i must most perfectly resemble them--
thoughts gone dim
it is more natural to me, lying down
then the sky and i are in open conversation,
and i shall be useful when i lie down finally
then the trees may touch me for once, and the flowers have time for me
you bring me good news from the clinic,
whipping off your silk scarf, exhibiting the tight white
mummy-cloths, smiling im all right
when i was nine, a lime-green anesthetist
fed me banana gas through a frog-mask the nauseous vault
boomed wild bad dreams and the jovian voices of surgeons
the mother swam up, holding a tin basin
o i was sick
theyve changed all that traveling
nude as cleopatra in my well-boiled hospital shift,
fizzy with sedatives and unusually humorous,
i roll to an anteroom where a kind man
fists my fingers for me he makes me feel something precious
is leaking from the finger-vents at the count of two
darkness wipes me out like chalk on a blackboard
i dont know a thing
for five days i lie in secret,
tapped like a cask, the years draining into my pillow
even my best friend thinks im in the country
skin doesnt have roots, it peels away easy as paper
when i grin, the stitches tauten i grow backward im twenty,
broody and in long skirts on my first husbands sofa, my fingers
buried in the lambswool of the dead poodle
i hadnt a cat yet
now shes done for, the dewlapped lady
i watched settle, line by line, in my mirror ---
old sock-face, sagged on a darning egg
theyve trapped her in some laboratory jar
let her die there, or whither incessantly for the next fifty years,
nodding and rocking and fingering her thin hair
mother to myself, i wake swaddled in gauze,
pink and smooth as a baby
you will be aware of an absence, presently,
growing beside you, like a tree,
a death tree, color gone, an australian gum tree ---
balding, gelded by lightning--an illusion,
and a sky like a pigs backside, an utter lack of attention
but right now you are dumb
and i love your stupidity,
the blind mirror of it i look in
and find no face but my own, and you think thats funny
it is good for me
to have you grab my nose, a ladder rung
one day you may touch whats wrong ---
the small skulls, the smashed blue hills, the godawful hush
till then your smiles are found money
this was the lands end the last fingers, knuckled and rheumatic,
cramped on nothing black
admonitory cliffs, and the sea exploding
with no bottom, or anything on the other side of it,
whitened by the faces of the drowned
now it is only gloomy, a dump of rocks ---
leftover soldiers from old, messy wars
the sea cannons into their ear, but they dont budge
other rocks hide their grudges under the water
the cliffs are edged with trefoils, stars and bells
such as fingers might embroider, close to death,
almost too small for the mists to bother with
the mists are part of the ancient paraphernalia ---
souls, rolled in the doom-noise of the sea
they bruise the rocks out of existence, then resurrect them
they go up without hope, like sighs
i walk among them, and they stuff my mouth with cotton
when they free me, i am beaded with tears
our lady of the shipwrecked is striding toward the horizon,
her marble skirts blown back in two pink wings
a marble sailor kneels at her foot distractedly, and at his foot
a peasant woman in black
is praying to the monument of the sailor praying
our lady of the shipwrecked is three times life size,
her lips sweet with divinity
she does not hear what the sailor or the peasant is saying ---
she is in love with the beautiful formlessness of the sea
gull-colored laces flap in the sea drafts
beside the postcard stalls
the peasants anchor them with conches one is told
these are the pretty trinkets the sea hides,
little shells made up into necklaces and toy ladies
they do not come from with bay of the dead down there,
but from another place, tropical and blue,
we have never been to
these are our crepes eat them before they blow cold
empty, i echo to the least footfall,
museum without statues, grand with pillars, porticoes, rotundas
in my courtyard a fountain leaps and sinks back into itself,
nun-hearted and blind to the world marble lilies
exhale their pallor like scent
i imagine myself with a great public,
mother of a white nike and several bald-eyed apollos
insread, the dead injure me attentions, and nothing can happen
blank-faced and mum as a nurse
a garden of mouthings purple, scarlet-speckled, black
the great corollas dilate, peeling back their silks
their musk encroaches, circle after circle,
a well of scents almost too dense to breathe in
hieratical in your frock coat, maestro of the bees,
you move among the many-breasted hives,
my heart under your foot, sister of a stone
trumpet-throats open to the beaks of birds
the golden rain tree drips its powders down
in these little boudoirs streaked with orange and red
the anthers nod their heads, potent as kings
to father dynasties the air is rich
here is a queenship no mother can contest ---
a fruit thats death to taste dark flesh, dark parings
in burrows narrow as a finger, solitary bees
keep house among the grasses kneeling down
i set my eyes to a hole-mouth and meet an eye
round, green, disconsolate as a tear
father, bridegroom, in this easter egg
under the coronal of sugar roses
the queen bee marries the winter of your year
will they occur,
these people with torso of steel
winged elbows and eyeholes
awaiting masses
of cloud to give them expression,
these super-people -
and my baby a nail
driven, driven in
he shrieks in his grease
bones nosing for distance
and i, nearly extinct,
his three teeth cutting
themselves on my thumb -
and the star,
the old story
in the lane i meet sheep and wagons,
red earth, motherly blood
o you who eat
people like light rays, leave
this one
mirror safe, unredeemed
by the doves annihilation,
the glory
the power, the glory
this wood burns a dark
incense pale moss drips
in elbow-scarves, beards
from the archaic
bones of the great trees
blue mists move over
a lake thick with fish
snails scroll the border
of the glazed water
with coils of rams-horn
out in the open
down there the late year
hammers her rare and
various metals
old pewter roots twist
up from the jet-backed
mirror of water
and while the airs clear
hourglass sifts a
drift of goldpieces
bright waterlights are
sliding their quoits one
after the other
down boles of the fir
in sunless air, under pines
green to the point of blackness, some
founding father set these lobed, warped stones
to loom in the leaf-filtered gloom
black as the charred knuckle-bones
of a giant or extinct
animal, come from another
age, another planet surely flanked
by the orange and fuchsia bonfire
of azaleas, sacrosanct
these stones guard a dark repose
and keep their shapes intact while sun
alters shadows of rose and iris ---
long, short, long --- in the lit garden
and kindles a days-end blaze
colored to dull the pigment
of azaleas, yet burnt out
quick as they to follow the lights tint
and intensity by midnight
by noon and throughout the brunt
of various weathers is
to know the still heart of the stones
stones that take the whole summer to lose
their dream of the winters cold stones
warming at core only as
frost forms no mans crowbar could
uproot them their beards are ever-
green nor do they, once in a hundred
years, go down to drink the river
no thirst disturbs a stones bed
mayday  two came to field in such wise
a daisied mead, each said to each,
so were they one so sought they couch,
across barbed stile, through flocked brown cows
no pitchforked farmer, please, she said
may cockcrow guard us safe, said he
by blackthorn thicket, flower spray
they pitched their coats, come to green bed
below  a fen where water stood
aslant  their hill of stinging nettle
then, honor-bound, mute grazing cattle
above  leaf-wraithed white air, white cloud
all afternoon these lovers lay
until the sun turned pale from warm,
until sweet wind changed tune, blew harm
cruel nettles stung her angles raw
rueful, most vexed, that tender skin
should accept so fell a wound,
he stamped and cracked stalks to the ground
which had caused his dear girl pain
now he goes from his rightful road
and, under honor, will depart
while she stands burning, venom-girt,
in wait for sharper smart to fade
nobody in the lane, and nothing, nothing but blackberries,
blackberries on either side, though on the right mainly,
a blackberry alley, going down in hooks, and a sea
somewhere at the end of it, heaving blackberries
big as the ball of my thumb, and dumb as eyes
ebon in the hedges, fat
with blue-red juices these they squander on my fingers
i had not asked for such a blood sisterhood they must love me
they accommodate themselves to my milkbottle, flattening their sides
overhead go the choughs in black, cacophonous flocks ---
bits of burnt paper wheeling in a blown sky
theirs is the only voice, protesting, protesting
i do not think the sea will appear at all
the high, green meadows are glowing, as if lit from within
i come to one bush of berries so ripe it is a bush of flies,
hanging their bluegreen bellies and their wing panes in a chinese screen
the honey-feast of the berries has stunned them they believe in heaven
one more hook, and the berries and bushes end
the only thing to come now is the sea
from between two hills a sudden wind funnels at me,
slapping its phantom laundry in my face
these hills are too green and sweet to have tasted salt
i follow the sheep path between them a last hook brings me
to the hills northern face, and the face is orange rock
that looks out on nothing, nothing but a great space
of white and pewter lights, and a din like silversmiths
beating and beating at an intractable metal
what is this, behind this veil, is it ugly, is it beautiful?
it is shimmering, has it breasts, has it edges?
i am sure it is unique, i am sure it is what i want
when i am quiet at my cooking i feel it looking, i feel it thinking
is this the one i am too appear for,
is this the elect one, the one with black eye-pits and a scar?
measuring the flour, cutting off the surplus,
adhering to rules, to rules, to rules
is this the one for the annunciation?
my god, what a laugh
but it shimmers, it does not stop, and i think it wants me
i would not mind if it were bones, or a pearl button
i do not want much of a present, anyway, this year
after all i am alive only by accident
i would have killed myself gladly that time any possible way
now there are these veils, shimmering like curtains,
the diaphanous satins of a january window
white as babies bedding and glittering with dead breath o ivory
it must be a tusk there, a ghost column
can you not see i do not mind what it is
can you not give it to me?
do not be ashamed--i do not mind if it is small
do not be mean, i am ready for enormity
let us sit down to it, one on either side, admiring the gleam,
the glaze, the mirrory variety of it
let us eat our last supper at it, like a hospital plate
i know why you will not give it to me,
you are terrified
the world will go up in a shriek, and your head with it,
bossed, brazen, an antique shield,
a marvel to your great-grandchildren
do not be afraid, it is not so
i will only take it and go aside quietly
you will not even hear me opening it, no paper crackle,
no falling ribbons, no scream at the end
i do not think you credit me with this discretion
if you only knew how the veils were killing my days
to you they are only transparencies, clear air
but my god, the clouds are like cotton
armies of them they are carbon monoxide
sweetly, sweetly i breathe in,
filling my veins with invisibles, with the million
probable motes that tick the years off my life
you are silver-suited for the occasion o adding machine-----
is it impossible for you to let something go and have it go whole?
must you stamp each piece purple,
must you kill what you can?
there is one thing i want today, and only you can give it to me
it stands at my window, big as the sky
it breathes from my sheets, the cold dead center
where split lives congeal and stiffen to history
let it not come by the mail, finger by finger
let it not come by word of mouth, i should be sixty
by the time the whole of it was delivered, and to numb to use it
only let down the veil, the veil, the veil
if it were death
i would admire the deep gravity of it, its timeless eyes
i would know you were serious
there would be a nobility then, there would be a birthday
and the knife not carve, but enter
pure and clean as the cry of a baby,
and the universe slide from my side
on the stiff twig up there
hunches a wet black rook
arranging and rearranging its feathers in the rain
i do not expect a miracle
or an accident
to set the sight on fire
in my eye, not seek
any more in the desultory weather some design,
but let spotted leaves fall as they fall,
without ceremony, or portent
although, i admit, i desire,
occasionally, some backtalk
from the mute sky, i cant honestly complain
a certain minor light may still
leap incandescent
out of the kitchen table or chair
as if a celestial burning took
possession of the most obtuse objects now and then ---
thus hallowing an interval
otherwise inconsequent
by bestowing largesse, honor,
one might say love at any rate, i now walk
wary for it could happen
even in this dull, ruinous landscape sceptical,
yet politic ignorant
of whatever angel may choose to flare
suddenly at my elbow i only know that a rook
ordering its black feathers can so shine
as to seize my senses, haul
my eyelids up, and grant
a brief respite from fear
of total neutrality with luck,
trekking stubborn through this season
of fatigue, i shall
patch together a content
of sorts miracles occur,
if you care to call those spasmodic
tricks of radiance miracles the waits begun again,
the long wait for the angel
for that rare, random descent
the black bull bellowed before the sea
the sea, till that day orderly,
hove up against bendylaw
the queen in the mulberry arbor stared
stiff as a queen on a playing card
the king fingered his beard
a blue sea, four horny bull-feet,
a bull-snouted sea that wouldnt stay put,
bucked at the garden gate
along box-lined walks in the florid sun
toward the rowdy bellow and back again
the lords and ladies ran
the great bronze gate began to crack,
the sea broke in at every crack,
pellmell, blueblack
the bull surged up, the bull surged down,
not to be stayed by a daisy chain
nor by any learned man
o the kings tidy acre is under the sea,
and the royal rose in the bulls belly,
and the bull on the kings highway
two, of course there are two
it seems perfectly natural now ---
the one who never looks up, whose eyes are lidded
and balled? like blakes
who exhibits
the birthmarks that are his trademark ---
the scald scar of water,
the nude
verdigris of the condor
i am red meat his beak
claps sidewise i am not his yet
he tells me how badly i photograph
he tells me how sweet
the babies look in their hospital
icebox, a simple
frill at the neck
then the flutings of their ionian
death-gowns
then two little feet
he does not smile or smoke
the other does that
his hair long and plausive
bastard
masturbating a glitter
he wants to be loved
i do not stir
the frost makes a flower,
the dew makes a star,
the dead bell,
the dead bell
somebodys done for
two virtues ride, by stallion, by nag,
to grind our knives and scissors
lantern-jawed reason, squat common sense,
one courting doctors of all sorts,
one, housewives and shopkeepers
the trees are lopped, the poodles trim,
the laborers nails pared level
since those two civil servants set
their whetstone to the blunted edge
and minced the muddling devil
whose owl-eyes in the scraggly wood
scared mothers to miscarry,
drove the dogs to cringe and whine
and turned the farmboys temper wolfish,
the housewifes, desultory
in the rectory garden on his evening walk
paced brisk father shawn a cold day, a sodden one it was
in black novemeber after a sliding rain
dew stood in chill sweat on each stalk,
each thorn spiring from wet earth, a blue haze
hung caught in dark-webbed branches like a fabulous heron
hauled sudden from solitude,
hair prickling on his head,
father shawn perceived a ghost
shaping itself from that mist
how now, father shawn crisply addressed the ghost
wavering there, gauze-edged, smelling of woodsmoke,
what manner of business are you on?
from your blue pallor, id say you inhabited the frozen waste
of hell, and not the fiery part yet to judge by that dazzled look,
that noble mien, perhaps youve late quitted heaven?
in voice furred with frost,
ghost said to priest
neither of those countries do i frequent
earth is my haunt
come, come, father shawn gave an impatient shrug,
i dont ask you to spin some rridiculous fable
of gilded harps or gnawing fire simply tell
after your lifes end, what just epilogue
god ordained to follow up your days is it such trouble
to satisfy the questions of a curious old fool?
in life, love gnawed my skin
to this white bone
what love did then, love does now
gnaws me through
what love, asked father shawn, but too great love
of flawed earth-flesh could cause this sorry pass?
some damned condition you are in
thinking never to have left the world, you grieve
as though alive, shriveling in torment thus
to atone as shade for sin that lured blind man
the day of doom
is not yest come
until that time
a crock of dust is my dear hom
fond phantom, cried shocked father shawn,
can there be such stubbornness--
a soul grown feverish, clutching its dead body-tree
like a last storm-crossed leaf? best get you gone
to judgment in a higher court of grace
repent, depart, before gods trump-crack splits the sky
from that pale mist
ghost swore to priest
there sits no higher court
than mans red heart
the womb
rattles its pod, the moon
discharges itself from the tree with nowhere to go
my landscape is a hand with no lines,
the roads bunched to a knot,
the knot myself,
myself the rose you acheive---
this body,
this ivory
ungodly as a childs shriek
spiderlike, i spin mirrors,
loyal to my image,
uttering nothing but blood---
taste it, dark red
and my forest
my funeral,
and this hill and this
gleaming with the mouths of corpses
an old beast ended in this place
a monster of wood and rusty teeth
fire smelted his eyes to lumps
of pale blue vitreous stuff, opaque
as resin drops oozed from pine bark
the rafters and struts of his body wear
their char of karakul still i cant tell
how long his carcass had foundered under
the rubbish of summers, the black-leaved falls
now little weeds insinuate
soft suede tongues between his bones
his armorplate, his toppled stones
are an esplanade for crickets
i pick and pry like a doctor or
arch?ologist among
iron entrails, enameled bowl,
the coils and pipes that made him run
the small dell eats what ate it once
and yet the ichor of the spring
proceeds clear as it ever did
from the broken throat, that marshy lip
it flows off below the green and white
balustrade of a sag-backed bridge
leaning over, i encounter one
blue and improbable person
framed in a basketwork of cattails
o she is gracious and austere,
seated beneath the toneless water
it is not i, it is not i
no animal spoils on her green doorstep
and we shall never enter there
where the durable ones keep house
the stream that hustles us
neither nourishes nor heals
revolving in oval loops of solar speed,
couched in cauls of clay as in holy robes,
dead men render love and war no heed,
lulled in the ample womb of the full-tilt globe
no spiritual caesars are these dead
they want no proud paternal kingdom come
and when at last they blunder into bed
world-wrecked, they seek only oblivion
rolled round with goodly loam and cradled deep,
these bone shanks will not wake immaculate
to trumpet-toppling dawn of doomstruck day
they loll forever in colossal sleep
nor can gods stern, shocked angels cry them up
from their fond, final, infamous decay
gerd sits spindle-shaped in her dark tent,
lean face gone tawn with seasons ,
skin worn down to the knucklebones
at her tough trade without times taint
the burnished ball hangs fire in her hands, a lens
fusing times three horizons
two enter to tap her sight, a green pair
fresh leaved out in vows come tell
how we shall do together,
well or ill gerd slants a look at each most dear,
each to the other fit fiber for stern weather
slowly she spins the ball
i see two stalwart apple trees
coupled by branches intertwined
and, springing all about,
staunch saplings to this house, thriving days
will bring crops increase, and harvest fruit
follow on kind wind
no hardship then? he asks well take
whatever trials to come, so say true
his bride echoes his word at that,
gerd whirls the ball ablaze rough storm, she grunts,  may wreak
some havoc on tender limb, and yet
strengthen that orchard thereby
their small price paid, these wedded ones
walk forth into sun-moneyed air, quickened
to savor their span of flourishing
aloof, squatting mummy-wise, gerd scans
that clairvoyant quartz which once, at her own wishing,
exacted her first simple sight for this strict second
then, a free-gadding hoyden, gerd had craved
to govern more sight than given to a woman
by wits alone to foresee her lovers faith
and their future lot, she braved
church curse to ken that crooked oath
whereby one hires a demon
a flash like doomcrack rent nights black
gods work stood anchored in that glare
focusing all times day-suns in one
so beggar gerd might aim her look
at gorgon-prospects with power to strike to stone
hearts of those who pierced times core
what gerd saw then engraved her mind ---
plague-pitted as the moon each bud
shriveling to cinders at its source,
each love blazing blind to its gutted end ---
and, fixed in the crystal center, grinning fierce
earths ever-green deaths head
the telegram says you have gone away
and left our bankrupt circus on its town
there is nothing more for me to say
the maestro gives the singing birds their pay
and they buy tickets for the tropic zone
the telegram says you have gone away
the clever wolly dogs have had their day
they shoot the dice for one remaining bone
there is nothing more for me to say
the lion and the tigers turn to clay
and jumbo sadly trumpets into stone
the telegram says you have gone away
the morbid cobras wits have run astray
he rents his poisons out by telegram
there is nothing more for me to say
the colored tenst all topple in the bay
the magic sawdust writes address unknown
the telegram says you have gone away
there is nothing more for me to say
i made a fire being tired
of the white fists of old
letters and their death rattle
when i came too close to the wastebasket
what did they know that i didnt?
grain by grain, they unrolled
sands where a dream of clear water
grinned like a getaway car
i am not subtle
love, love, and well, i was tired
of cardboard cartons the color of cement or a dog pack
holding in its hate
dully, under a pack of men in red jackets,
and the eyes and times of the postmarks
this fire may lick and fawn, but it is merciless
a glass case
my fingers would enter although
they melt and sag, they are told
do not touch
and here is an end to the writing,
the spry hooks that bend and cringe and the smiles, the smiles
and at least it will be a good place now, the attic
at least i wont be strung just under the surface,
dumb fish
with one tin eye,
watching for glints,
riding my arctic
between this wish and that wish
so, i poke at the carbon birds in my housedress
they are more beautiful than my bodiless owl,
they console me--
rising and flying, but blinded
they would flutter off, black and glittering, they would be coal angels
only they have nothing to say but anybody
i have seen to that
with the butt of a rake
i flake up papers that breathe like people,
i fan them out
between the yellow lettuces and the german cabbage
involved in its weird blue dreams
involved in a foetus
and a name with black edges
wilts at my foot,
sinuous orchis
in a nest of root-hairs and boredom--
pale eyes, patent-leather gutturals
warm rain greases my hair, extinguishes nothing
my veins glow like trees
the dogs are tearing a fox this is what it is like
a read burst and a cry
that splits from its ripped bag and does not stop
with that dead eye
and the stuffed expression, but goes on
dyeing the air,
telling the particles of the clouds, the leaves, the water
what immortality is that it is immortal
tell me what you see in it
the pine tree like a rorschach-blot
black against the orange light
plant an orange pumpkin patch
which at twelve will quaintly hatch
nine black mice with ebon coach,
or walk into the orange and make
a devils cataract of black
obscure gods eye with corkscrew fleck
put orange mistress half in sun,
half in shade, until her skin
tattoos black leaves on tangerine
read black magic or holy book
or lyric of love in the orange and black
till dark is conquered by orange cock,
but more pragmatic than all this,
say how crafty the painter was
to make orange and black ambiguous
it is ten years, now, since we rowed to childrens island
the sun flamed straight down that noon on the water off marblehead
that summer we wore black glasses to hide our eyes
we were always crying, in our spare rooms, little put-upon sisters,
in the two, huge, white, handsome houses in swampscott
when the sweetheart from england appeared, with her cream skin and yardley cosmetics,
i had to sleep in the same room with the baby on a too-short cot,
and the seven-year-old wouldnt go out unless his jersey stripes
matched the stripes of his socks
or it was richness --- eleven rooms and a yacht
with a polished mahogany stair to let into the water
and a cabin boy who could decorate cakes in six-colored frosting
but i didnt know how to cook, and babies depressed me
nights, i wrote in my diary spitefully, my fingers red
with triangular scorch marks from ironing tiny ruchings and puffed sleeves
when the sporty wife and her doctor husband went on one of their cruises
they left me a borrowed maid named ellen, for protection,
and a small dalmation
in your house, the main house, you were better off
you had a rose garden and a guest cottage and a model apothecary shop
and a cook and a maid, and knew about the key to the bourbon
i remember you playing ja-da in a pink piqu dress
on the game-room piano, when the big people were out,
and the maid smoked and shot pool under a green shaded lamp
the cook had one walleye and couldnt sleep, she was so nervous
on trial, from ireland, she burned batch after batch of cookies
till she was fired
o what has come over us, my sister
on that day-off the two of us cried so hard to get
we lifted a sugared ham and a pineapple from the grownups icebox
and rented an old green boat i rowed you read
aloud, cross-legged on the stern seat, from the generation of vipers
so we bobbed out to the island it was deserted ---
a gallery of creaking porches and still interiors,
stopped and awful as a photograph of somebody laughing
but ten years dead
the bold gulls dove as if they owned it all
we picked up sticks of driftwood and beat them off,
then stepped down the steep beach shelf and into the water
we kicked and talked the thick salt kept us up
i see us floating there yet, inseparable--two cork dolls
what keyhole have we slipped through, what door has shut?
the shadows of the grasses inched round like hands of a clock,
and from our opposite continents we wave and call
everything has happened
in alicante they bowl the barrels
bumblingly over the nubs of the cobbles
past the yellow-paella eateries,
below the ramshackle back-alley balconies,
while the cocks and hens
in the roofgardens
scuttle repose with crowns and cackles
kumquat-colored trolleys ding as they trundle
passengers under an indigo fizzle
needling spumily down from the wires
alongside the sibliant narhor the lovers
hear loudspeakers boom
from each neon-lit palm
rumbas and sambas no ear-flaps can muffle
o cacophony, goddess of jazz and of quarrels,
crack-throated mistress of bagpipes and cymbals,
let be your con brios, your capricciosos,
crescendos, cadenzas, prestos and pretissimos,
my head on the pillow
piano, pianissimo
lullayed by susurrous lyres and viols
in the archological museum in cambridge is a stone
coffin of the fourth century ad containing the skeletons
of a woman, a mouse and a shrew the ankle-bone of the
woman has been slightly gnawed
rigged poker -stiff on her back
with a granite grin
this antique museum-cased lady
lies, companioned by the gimcrack
relics of a mouse and a shrew
that battened for a day on her ankle-bone
these three, unmasked now, bear
dry witness
to the gross eating game
wed wink at if we didnt hear
stars grinding, crumb by crumb,
our own grist down to its bony face
how they grip us through think and thick,
these barnacle dead
this lady heres no kin
of mine, yet kin she is shell suck
blood and whistle my narrow clean
to prove it as i think now of her hand,
from the mercury-backed glass
mother, grandmother, greatgrandmother
reach hag hands to haul me in,
and an image looms under the fishpond surface
where the daft father went down
with orange duck-feet winnowing this hair ---
all the long gone darlings they
get back, though, soon,
soon be it by wakes, weddings,
childbirths or a family barbecue
any touch, taste, tangs
fit for those outlaws to ride home on,
and to sanctuary usurping the armchair
between tick
and tack of the clock, until we go,
each skulled-and-crossboned gulliver
riddled with ghosts, to lie
deadlocked with them, taking roots as cradles rock
first, are you our sort of a person?
do you wear
a glass eye, false teeth or a crutch,
a brace or a hook,
rubber breasts or a rubber crotch,
stitches to show somethings missing? no, no? then
how can we give you a thing?
stop crying
open your hand
empty? empty here is a hand
to fill it and willing
to bring teacups and roll away headaches
and do whatever you tell it
will you marry it?
it is guaranteed
to thumb shut your eyes at the end
and dissolve of sorrow
we make new stock from the salt
i notice you are stark naked
how about this suit -
black and stiff, but not a bad fit
will you marry it?
it is waterproof, shatterproof, proof
against fire and bombs through the roof
believe me, theyll bury you in it
now your head, excuse me, is empty
i have the ticket for that
come here, sweetie, out of the closet
well, what do you think of that?
naked as paper to start
but in twenty-five years shell be silver,
in fifty, gold
a living doll, everywhere you look
it can sew, it can cook,
it can talk, talk, talk
it works, there is nothing wrong with it
you have a hole, its a poultice
you have an eye, its an image
my boy, its your last resort
will you marry it, marry it, marry it
i ordered this, clean wood box
square as a chair and almost too heavy to lift
i would say it was the coffin of a midget
or a square baby
were there not such a din in it
the box is locked, it is dangerous
i have to live with it overnight
and i cant keep away from it
there are no windows, so i cant see what is in there
there is only a little grid, no exit
i put my eye to the grid
it is dark, dark,
with the swarmy feeling of african hands
minute and shrunk for export,
black on black, angrily clambering
how can i let them out?
it is the noise that appalls me most of all,
the unintelligible syllables
it is like a roman mob,
small, taken one by one, but my god, together
i lay my ear to furious latin
i am not a caesar
i have simply ordered a box of maniacs
they can be sent back
they can die, i need feed them nothing, i am the owner
i wonder how hungry they are
i wonder if they would forget me
if i just undid the locks and stood back and turned into a tree
there is the laburnum, its blond colonnades,
and the petticoats of the cherry
they might ignore me immediately
in my moon suit and funeral veil
i am no source of honey
so why should they turn on me?
tomorrow i will be sweet god, i will set them free
the box is only temporary
all morning in the strawberry field
they talked about the russians
squatted down between the rows
we listened
we heard the head woman say,
bomb them off the map
horseflies buzzed, paused and stung
and the taste of strawberries
turned thick and sour
mary said slowly, ive got a fella
old enough to go
if anything should happen
the sky was high and blue
two children laughed at tag
in the tall grass,
leaping awkward and long-legged
across the rutted road
the fields were full of bronzed young men
hoeing lettuce, weeding celery
the draft is passed, the woman said
we ought to have bombed them long ago
dont, pleaded the little girl
with blond braids
her blue eyes swam with vague terror
she added petishly, i cant see why
youre always talking this way
oh, stop worrying, nelda,
snapped the woman sharply
she stood up, a thin commanding figure
in faded dungarees
businesslike she asked us, how many quarts?
she recorded the total in her notebook,
and we all turned back to picking
kneeling over the rows,
we reached among the leaves
with quick practiced hands,
cupping the berry protectively before
snapping off the stem
between thumb and forefinger
they are the last romantics, these candles
upside-down hearts of light tipping wax fingers,
and the fingers, taken in by their own haloes,
grown milky, almost clear, like the bodies of saints
it is touching, the way theyll ignore
a whole family of prominent objects
simply to plumb the deeps of an eye
in its hollow of shadows, its fringe of reeds,
and the owner past thirty, no beauty at all
daylight would be more judicious,
giving everybody a fair hearing
they should have gone out with the balloon flights and the stereopticon
this is no time for the private point of view
when i light them, my nostrils prickle
their pale, tentative yellows
drag up false, edwardian sentiments,
and i remember my maternal grandmother from vienna
as a schoolgirl she gave roses to franz josef
the burghers sweated and wept the children wore white
and my grandfather moped in the tyrol,
imagining himself a headwaiter in america,
floating in a high-church hush
among ice buckets, frosty napkins
these little globes of light are sweet as pears
kindly with invalids and mawkish women,
they mollify the bald moon
nun-souled, they burn heavenward and never marry
the eyes of the child i nurse are scarcely open
in twenty years i shall be retrograde
as these drafty ephemerids
i watch their spilt tears cloud and dull to pearls
how shall i tell anything at all
to this infant still in a birth-drowse?
tonight, like a shawl, the mild light enfolds her,
the shadows stoop over the guests at a christening
ou do not do, you do not do
any more, black shoe
in which i have lived like a foot
for thirty years, poor and white,
barely daring to breathe or achoo
daddy, i have had to kill you
you died before i had time--
marble-heavy, a bag full of god,
ghastly statue with one gray toe
big as a frisco seal
and a head in the freakish atlantic
where it pours bean green over blue
in the waters off beautiful nauset
i used to pray to recover you
ach, du
in the german tongue, in the polish town
scraped flat by the roller
of wars, wars, wars
but the name of the town is common
my polack friend
says there are a dozen or two
so i never could tell where you
put your foot, your root,
i never could talk to you
the tongue stuck in my jaw
it stuck in a barb wire snare
ich, ich, ich, ich,
i could hardly speak
i thought every german was you
and the language obscene
an engine, an engine
chuffing me off like a jew
a jew to dachau, auschwitz, belsen
i began to talk like a jew
i think i may well be a jew
the snows of the tyrol, the clear beer of vienna
are not very pure or true
with my gipsy ancestress and my weird luck
and my taroc pack and my taroc pack
i may be a bit of a jew
i have always been scared of you,
with your luftwaffe, your gobbledygoo
and your neat mustache
and your aryan eye, bright blue
panzer-man, panzer-man, o you--
not god but a swastika
so black no sky could squeak through
every woman adores a fascist,
the boot in the face, the brute
brute heart of a brute like you
you stand at the blackboard, daddy,
in the picture i have of you,
a cleft in your chin instead of your foot
but no less a devil for that, no not
any less the black man who
bit my pretty red heart in two
i was ten when they buried you
at twenty i tried to die
and get back, back, back to you
i thought even the bones would do
but they pulled me out of the sack,
and they stuck me together with glue
and then i knew what to do
i made a model of you,
a man in black with a meinkampf look
and a love of the rack and the screw
and i said i do, i do
so daddy, im finally through
the black telephones off at the root,
the voices just cant worm through
if ive killed one man, ive killed two--
the vampire who said he was you
and drank my blood for a year,
seven years, if you want to know
daddy, you can lie back now
theres a stake in your fat black heart
and the villagers never liked you
they are dancing and stamping on you
they always knew it was you
daddy, daddy, you bastard, im through
i know the bottom, she says i know it with my great tap root
it is what you fear
i do not fear it i have been there
is it the sea you hear in me,
its dissatisfactions?
or the voice of nothing, that was your madness?
love is a shadow
how you lie and cry after it
listen these are its hooves it has gone off, like a horse
all night i shall gallop thus, impetuously,
till your head is a stone, your pillow a little turf,
echoing, echoing
or shall i bring you the sound of poisons?
this is rain now, this big hush
and this is the fruit of it tin-white, like arsenic
i have suffered the atrocity of sunsets
scorched to the root
my red filaments burn and stand, a hand of wires
now i break up in pieces that fly about like clubs
a wind of such violence
will tolerate no bystanding i must shriek
the moon, also, is merciless she would drag me
cruelly, being barren
her radiance scathes me or perhaps i have caught her
i let her go i let her go
diminished and flat, as after radical surgery
how your bad dreams possess and endow me
i am inhabited by a cry
nightly it flaps out
looking, with its hooks, for something to love
i am terrified by this dark thing
that sleeps in me
all day i feel its soft, feathery turnings, its malignity
clouds pass and disperse
are those the faces of love, those pale irretrievables?
is it for such i agitate my heart?
i am incapable of more knowledge
what is this, this face
so murderous in its strangle of branches? -
its snaky acids hiss
it petrifies the will these are the isolate, slow faults
that kill, that kill, that kill
over your body the clouds go
high, high and icily
and a little flat, as if they
unlike swans,
having no reflections
unlike you,
with no strings attached
all cool, all blue unlike you ---
you, there on your back,
eyes to the sky
the spider-men have caught you,
winding and twining their petty fetters,
their bribes ---
so many silks
how they hate you
they converse in the valley of your fingers, they are inchworms
they would have you sleep in their cabinets,
this tow and that toe, a relic
step off
step off seven leagues, like those distances
that revolve in crivelli, untouchable
let this eye be an eagle,
the shadow of his lip, an abyss
the groundhog on the mountain did not run
but fatly scuttled into the splayed fern
and faced me, back to a ledge of dirt, to rattle
her sallow rodent teeth like castanets
against my leaning down, would not exchange
for that wary clatter sound or gesture
of love  claws braced, at bay, my currency not hers
such meetings never occur in marchen
where love-met groundhogs love one in return,
where straight talk is the rule, whether warm or hostile,
which no gruff animal misinterprets
from what grace am i fallen tongues are strange,
signs say nothing the falcon who spoke clear
to canacee cries gibberish to coarsened ears
irrefutable, beautifully smug
as venus, pedestalled on a half-shell
shawled in blond hair and the salt
scrim of a sea breeze, the women
settle in their belling dresses
over each weighty stomach a face
floats calm as a moon or a cloud
smiling to themselves, they meditate
devoutly as the dutch bulb
forming its twenty petals
the dark still nurses its secret
on the green hill, under the thorn trees,
they listen for the millennium,
the knock of the small, new heart
pink-buttoned infants attend them
looping wool, doing nothing in particular,
they step among the archetypes
dusk hoods them in mary-blue
while far off, the axle of winter
grinds round, bearing down the straw,
the star, the wise grey men
old goatherds swear how all night long they hear
the warning whirr and burring of the bird
who wakes with darkness and till dawn works hard
vampiring dry of milk each great goat udder
moon full, moon dark, the chary dairy farmer
dreams that his fattest cattle dwindle, fevered
by claw-cuts of the goatsucker, alias devil-bird,
its eye, flashlit, a chip of ruby fire
so fables say the goatsucker moves, masked from mens sight
in an ebony air, on wings of witch cloth,
well-named, ill-famed a knavish fly-by-night,
yet it never milked any goat, nor dealt cow death
and shadows only--cave-mouth bristle beset--
cockchafers and the wan, green luna moth
pure? what does it mean?
the tongues of hell
are dull, dull as the triple
tongues of dull, fat cerebus
who wheezes at the gate incapable
of licking clean
the aguey tendon, the sin, the sin
the tinder cries
the indelible smell
of a snuffed candle
love, love, the low smokes roll
from me like isadoras scarves, im in a fright
one scarf will catch and anchor in the wheel
such yellow sullen smokes
make their own element they will not rise,
but trundle round the globe
choking the aged and the meek,
the weak
hothouse baby in its crib,
the ghastly orchid
hanging its hanging garden in the air,
devilish leopard
radiation turned it white
and killed it in an hour
greasing the bodies of adulterers
like hiroshima ash and eating in
the sin the sin
darling, all night
i have been flickering, off, on, off, on
the sheets grow heavy as a lechers kiss
three days three nights
lemon water, chicken
water, water make me retch
i am too pure for you or anyone
your body
hurts me as the world hurts god i am a lantern ---
my head a moon
of japanese paper, my gold beaten skin
infinitely delicate and infinitely expensive
does not my heat astound you and my light
all by myself i am a huge camellia
glowing and coming and going, flush on flush
i think i am going up,
i think i may rise ---
the beads of hot metal fly, and i, love, i
am a pure acetylene
virgin
attended by roses,
by kisses, by cherubim,
by whatever these pink things mean
not you, nor him
not him, nor him
my selves dissolving, old whore petticoats ---
to paradise
enter the chilly no-mans land of about
five oclock in the morning, the no-color void
where the waking head rubbishes out the draggled lot
of sulfurous dreamscapes and obscure lunar conundrums
which seemed, when dreamed, to mean so profoundly much,
gets ready to face the ready-made creation
of chairs and bureaus and sleep-twisted sheets
this is the kingdom of the fading apparition,
the oracular ghost who dwindles on pin-legs
to a knot of laundry, with a classic bunch of sheets
upraised, as a hand, emblematic of farewell
at this joint between two worlds and two entirely
incompatible modes of time, the raw material
of our meat-and-potato thoughts assumes the nimbus
of ambrosial revelation and so departs
chair and bureau are the hieroglyphs
of some godly utterance wakened heads ignore
so these posed sheets, before they thin to nothing,
speak in sign language of a lost otherworld,
a world we lose by merely waking up
trailing its telltale tatters only at the outermost
fringe of mundane vision, this ghost goes
hand aloft, goodbye, goodbye, not down
into the rocky gizzard of the earth,
but toward a region where our thick atmosphere
diminishes, and god knows what is there
a point of exclamation marks that sky
in ringing orange like a stellar carrot
its round period, displaced and green,
suspends beside it the first point, the starting
point of eden, next the new moons curve
go, ghost of our mother and father, ghost of us,
and ghost of our dreams children, in those sheets
which signify our origin and end,
to the cloud-cuckoo land of color wheels
and pristine alphabets and cows that moo
and moo as they jump over moons as new
as that crisp cusp toward which you voyage now
hail and farewell hello, goodbye o keeper
of the profane grail, the dreaming skull




THE RAVEN.


  Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary,
  Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore--
  While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping,
  As of some one gently rapping--rapping at my chamber door.
  "'Tis some visitor," I muttered, "tapping at my chamber door--
          Only this and nothing more."

  Ah, distinctly I remember, it was in the bleak December,
  And each separate dying ember wrought its ghost upon the floor.
  Eagerly I wished the morrow;--vainly I had sought to borrow
  From my books surcease of sorrow--sorrow for the lost Lenore--
  For the rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
          Nameless here for evermore.

  And the silken sad uncertain rustling of each purple curtain
  Thrilled me--filled me with fantastic terrors never felt before;
  So that now, to still the beating of my heart, I stood repeating
  "'Tis some visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door--
  Some late visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door;--
      This it is and nothing more."

  Presently my soul grew stronger; hesitating then no longer,
  "Sir," said I, "or Madam, truly your forgiveness I implore;
  But the fact is I was napping, and so gently you came rapping,
  And so faintly you came tapping--tapping at my chamber door,
  That I scarce was sure I heard you"--here I opened wide the door:--
        Darkness there and nothing more.

  Deep into that darkness peering, long I stood there wondering,
    fearing,
  Doubting, dreaming dreams no mortal ever dared to dream before;
  But the silence was unbroken, and the darkness gave no token,
  And the only word there spoken was the whispered word, "Lenore!"
  This I whispered, and an echo murmured back the word, "Lenore!"
        Merely this and nothing more.

  Back into the chamber turning, all my soul within me burning,
  Soon I heard again a tapping, somewhat louder than before.
  "Surely," said I, "surely that is something at my window lattice;
  Let me see, then, what thereat is, and this mystery explore--
  Let my heart be still a moment, and this mystery explore;--
      'Tis the wind and nothing more."

  Open here I flung the shutter, when, with many a flirt and flutter,
  In there stepped a stately Raven of the saintly days of yore;
  Not the least obeisance made he: not an instant stopped or stayed he;
  But, with mien of lord or lady, perched above my chamber door--
  Perched upon a bust of Pallas just above my chamber door--
      Perched, and sat, and nothing more.

  Then this ebony bird beguiling my sad fancy into smiling,
  By the grave and stern decorum of the countenance it wore,
  "Though thy crest be shorn and shaven, thou," I said, "art sure no
    craven,
  Ghastly grim and ancient Raven wandering from the Nightly shore--
  Tell me what thy lordly name is on the Night's Plutonian shore!"
        Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

  Much I marvelled this ungainly fowl to hear discourse so plainly,
  Though its answer little meaning--little relevancy bore;
  For we cannot help agreeing that no living human being
  Ever yet was blessed with seeing bird above his chamber door--
  Bird or beast upon the sculptured bust above his chamber door,
        With such name as "Nevermore."

  But the Raven, sitting lonely on that placid bust, spoke only
  That one word, as if his soul in that one word he did outpour.
  Nothing further then he uttered--not a feather then he fluttered--
  Till I scarcely more than muttered, "Other friends have flown before--
  On the morrow _he_ will leave me, as my hopes have flown before."
        Then the bird said, "Nevermore."

  Startled at the stillness broken by reply so aptly spoken,
  "Doubtless," said I, "what it utters is its only stock and store,
  Caught from some unhappy master whom unmerciful Disaster
  Followed fast and followed faster till his songs one burden bore--
  Till the dirges of his Hope the melancholy burden bore
      Of 'Never--nevermore.'"

  But the Raven still beguiling all my sad soul into smiling,
  Straight I wheeled a cushioned seat in front of bird and bust and
    door;
  Then, upon the velvet sinking, I betook myself to linking
  Fancy unto fancy, thinking what this ominous bird of yore--
  What this grim, ungainly, ghastly, gaunt, and ominous bird of yore
      Meant in croaking "Nevermore."

  This I sat engaged in guessing, but no syllable expressing
  To the fowl whose fiery eyes now burned into my bosom's core;
  This and more I sat divining, with my head at ease reclining
  On the cushion's velvet lining that the lamp-light gloated o'er,
  But whose velvet violet lining with the lamp-light gloating o'er,
        _She_ shall press, ah, nevermore!

  Then, methought, the air grew denser, perfumed from an unseen censer
  Swung by Seraphim whose foot-falls tinkled on the tufted floor.
  "Wretch," I cried, "thy God hath lent thee--by these angels he hath
    sent thee
  Respite--respite aad nepenth from thy memories of Lenore!
  Quaff, oh quaff this kind nepenth, and forget this lost Lenore!"
        Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

  "Prophet!" said I, "thing of evil!--prophet still, if bird or devil!--
  Whether Tempter sent, or whether tempest tossed thee here ashore,
  Desolate yet all undaunted, on this desert land enchanted--
  On this home by Horror haunted--tell me truly, I implore--
  Is there--_is_ there balm in Gilead?--tell me--tell me, I implore!"
      Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

  "Prophet!" said I, "thing of evil!--prophet still, if bird or devil!
  By that Heaven that bends above us--by that God we both adore--
  Tell this soul with sorrow laden if, within the distant Aidenn,
  It shall clasp a sainted maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
  Clasp a rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore."
        Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

  "Be that word our sign of parting, bird or fiend!" I shrieked,
    upstarting--
  "Get thee back into the tempest and the Night's Plutonian shore!
  Leave no black plume as a token of that lie thy soul hath spoken!
  Leave my loneliness unbroken!--quit the bust above my door!
  Take thy beak from out my heart, and take thy form from off my door!"
      Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

  And the Raven, never flitting, still is sitting, still is sitting
  On the pallid bust of Pallas just above my chamber door;
  And his eyes have all the seeming of a demon's that is dreaming,
  And the lamp-light o'er him streaming throws his shadow on the floor;
  And my soul from out that shadow that lies floating on the floor
      Shall be lifted--nevermore!


Published, 1845.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE BELLS,


I.

  Hear the sledges with the bells--
  Silver bells!
  What a world of merriment their melody foretells!
  How they tinkle, tinkle, tinkle,
  In their icy air of night!
  While the stars, that oversprinkle
  All the heavens, seem to twinkle
  With a crystalline delight;
  Keeping time, time, time,
  In a sort of Runic rhyme,
  To the tintinnabulation that so musically wells
  From the bells, bells, bells, bells,
  Bells, bells, bells--
  From the jingling and the tinkling of the bells.


II.

  Hear the mellow wedding bells,
  Golden bells!
  What a world of happiness their harmony foretells!
  Through the balmy air of night
  How they ring out their delight!
  From the molten golden-notes,
  And all in tune,
  What a liquid ditty floats
  To the turtle-dove that listens, while she gloats
  On the moon!
  Oh, from out the sounding cells,
  What a gush of euphony voluminously wells!
  How it swells!
  How it dwells
  On the future! how it tells
  Of the rapture that impels
  To the swinging and the ringing
  Of the bells, bells, bells,
  Of the bells, bells, bells, bells,
  Bells, bells, bells--
  To the rhyming and the chiming of the bells!


III.

  Hear the loud alarum bells--
  Brazen bells!
  What a tale of terror now their turbulency tells!
  In the startled ear of night
  How they scream out their affright!
  Too much horrified to speak,
  They can only shriek, shriek,
  Out of tune,
  In a clamorous appealing to the mercy of the fire,
  In a mad expostulation with the deaf and frantic fire
  Leaping higher, higher, higher,
  With a desperate desire,
  And a resolute endeavor
  Now--now to sit or never,
  By the side of the pale-faced moon.
  Oh, the bells, bells, bells!
  What a tale their terror tells
  Of Despair!
  How they clang, and clash, and roar!
  What a horror they outpour
  On the bosom of the palpitating air!
  Yet the ear it fully knows,
  By the twanging,
  And the clanging,
  How the danger ebbs and flows;
  Yet the ear distinctly tells,
  In the jangling,
  And the wrangling,
  How the danger sinks and swells,
  By the sinking or the swelling in the anger of the bells--
  Of the bells--
  Of the bells, bells, bells, bells,
  Bells, bells, bells--
  In the clamor and the clangor of the bells!


IV.

  Hear the tolling of the bells--
  Iron bells!
  What a world of solemn thought their monody compels!
  In the silence of the night,
  How we shiver with affright
  At the melancholy menace of their tone!
  For every sound that floats
  From the rust within their throats
     Is a groan.
  And the people--ah, the people--
  They that dwell up in the steeple.
      All alone,
  And who toiling, toiling, toiling,
    In that muffled monotone,
  Feel a glory in so rolling
    On the human heart a stone--
  They are neither man nor woman--
  They are neither brute nor human--
      They are Ghouls:
  And their king it is who tolls;
  And he rolls, rolls, rolls,
           Rolls
  A pan from the bells!
  And his merry bosom swells
  With the pan of the bells!
  And he dances, and he yells;
  Keeping time, time, time,
  In a sort of Runic rhyme,
  To the pan of the bells--
      Of the bells:
  Keeping time, time, time,
  In a sort of Runic rhyme,
    To the throbbing of the bells--
  Of the bells, bells, bells--
    To the sobbing of the bells;
  Keeping time, time, time,
    As he knells, knells, knells,
  In a happy Runic rhyme,
  To the rolling of the bells--
  Of the bells, bells, bells--
  To the tolling of the bells,
  Of the bells, bells, bells, bells,
    Bells, bells, bells--
  To the moaning and the groaning of the bells.



1849.





       *       *       *       *       *





ULALUME.


  The skies they were ashen and sober;
    The leaves they were crisped and sere--
    The leaves they were withering and sere;
  It was night in the lonesome October
    Of my most immemorial year;
  It was hard by the dim lake of Auber,
    In the misty mid region of Weir--
  It was down by the dank tarn of Auber,
    In the ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir.

  Here once, through an alley Titanic.
    Of cypress, I roamed with my Soul--
    Of cypress, with Psyche, my Soul.
  These were days when my heart was volcanic
    As the scoriac rivers that roll--
    As the lavas that restlessly roll
  Their sulphurous currents down Yaanek
    In the ultimate climes of the pole--
  That groan as they roll down Mount Yaanek
    In the realms of the boreal pole.

  Our talk had been serious and sober,
    But our thoughts they were palsied and sere--
    Our memories were treacherous and sere--
  For we knew not the month was October,
  And we marked not the night of the year--
    (Ah, night of all nights in the year!)
  We noted not the dim lake of Auber--
    (Though once we had journeyed down here)--
  Remembered not the dank tarn of Auber,
    Nor the ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir.

  And now as the night was senescent
    And star-dials pointed to morn--
    As the sun-dials hinted of morn--
  At the end of our path a liquescent
    And nebulous lustre was born,
  Out of which a miraculous crescent
    Arose with a duplicate horn--
  Astarte's bediamonded crescent
    Distinct with its duplicate horn.

  And I said--"She is warmer than Dian:
    She rolls through an ether of sighs--
    She revels in a region of sighs:
  She has seen that the tears are not dry on
    These cheeks, where the worm never dies,
  And has come past the stars of the Lion
    To point us the path to the skies--
    To the Lethean peace of the skies--
  Come up, in despite of the Lion,
    To shine on us with her bright eyes--
  Come up through the lair of the Lion,
    With love in her luminous eyes."

  But Psyche, uplifting her finger,
    Said--"Sadly this star I mistrust--
    Her pallor I strangely mistrust:--
  Oh, hasten!--oh, let us not linger!
    Oh, fly!--let us fly!--for we must."
  In terror she spoke, letting sink her
    Wings till they trailed in the dust--
  In agony sobbed, letting sink her
    Plumes till they trailed in the dust--
    Till they sorrowfully trailed in the dust.

  I replied--"This is nothing but dreaming:
    Let us on by this tremulous light!
    Let us bathe in this crystalline light!
  Its Sibyllic splendor is beaming
    With Hope and in Beauty to-night:--
    See!--it flickers up the sky through the night!
  Ah, we safely may trust to its gleaming,
    And be sure it will lead us aright--
  We safely may trust to a gleaming
    That cannot but guide us aright,
    Since it flickers up to Heaven through the night."

  Thus I pacified Psyche and kissed her,
    And tempted her out of her gloom--
    And conquered her scruples and gloom;
  And we passed to the end of a vista,
    But were stopped by the door of a tomb--
    By the door of a legended tomb;
  And I said--"What is written, sweet sister,
    On the door of this legended tomb?"
    She replied--"Ulalume--Ulalume--
    'Tis the vault of thy lost Ulalume!"

  Then my heart it grew ashen and sober
    As the leaves that were crisped and sere--
    As the leaves that were withering and sere;
  And I cried--"It was surely October
    On _this_ very night of last year
    That I journeyed--I journeyed down here--
    That I brought a dread burden down here!
    On this night of all nights in the year,
    Ah, what demon has tempted me here?
  Well I know, now, this dim lake of Auber--
    This misty mid region of Weir--
  Well I know, now, this dank tarn of Auber,--
    This ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir."


1847.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO HELEN.


  I saw thee once--once only--years ago:
  I must not say _how_ many--but _not_ many.
  It was a July midnight; and from out
  A full-orbed moon, that, like thine own soul, soaring,
  Sought a precipitate pathway up through heaven,
  There fell a silvery-silken veil of light,
  With quietude, and sultriness and slumber,
  Upon the upturn'd faces of a thousand
  Roses that grew in an enchanted garden,
  Where no wind dared to stir, unless on tiptoe--
  Fell on the upturn'd faces of these roses
  That gave out, in return for the love-light,
  Their odorous souls in an ecstatic death--
  Fell on the upturn'd faces of these roses
  That smiled and died in this parterre, enchanted
  By thee, and by the poetry of thy presence.

  Clad all in white, upon a violet bank
  I saw thee half-reclining; while the moon
  Fell on the upturn'd faces of the roses,
  And on thine own, upturn'd--alas, in sorrow!

  Was it not Fate, that, on this July midnight--
  Was it not Fate (whose name is also Sorrow),
  That bade me pause before that garden-gate,
  To breathe the incense of those slumbering roses?
  No footstep stirred: the hated world all slept,
  Save only thee and me--(O Heaven!--O God!
  How my heart beats in coupling those two words!)--
  Save only thee and me. I paused--I looked--
  And in an instant all things disappeared.
  (Ah, bear in mind this garden was enchanted!)
  The pearly lustre of the moon went out:
  The mossy banks and the meandering paths,
  The happy flowers and the repining trees,
  Were seen no more: the very roses' odors
  Died in the arms of the adoring airs.
  All--all expired save thee--save less than thou:
  Save only the divine light in thine eyes--
  Save but the soul in thine uplifted eyes.
  I saw but them--they were the world to me.
  I saw but them--saw only them for hours--
  Saw only them until the moon went down.
  What wild heart-histories seemed to lie unwritten
  Upon those crystalline, celestial spheres!
  How dark a woe! yet how sublime a hope!
  How silently serene a sea of pride!
  How daring an ambition! yet how deep--
  How fathomless a capacity for love!

  But now, at length, dear Dian sank from sight,
  Into a western couch of thunder-cloud;
  And thou, a ghost, amid the entombing trees
  Didst glide away. _Only thine eyes remained._
  They _would not_ go--they never yet have gone.
  Lighting my lonely pathway home that night,
  _They_ have not left me (as my hopes have) since.
  They follow me--they lead me through the years.

  They are my ministers--yet I their slave.
  Their office is to illumine and enkindle--
  My duty, _to be saved_ by their bright light,
  And purified in their electric fire,
  And sanctified in their elysian fire.
  They fill my soul with Beauty (which is Hope),
  And are far up in Heaven--the stars I kneel to
  In the sad, silent watches of my night;
  While even in the meridian glare of day
  I see them still--two sweetly scintillant
  Venuses, unextinguished by the sun!


1846.





       *       *       *       *       *





ANNABEL LEE.


  It was many and many a year ago,
    In a kingdom by the sea,
  That a maiden there lived whom you may know
    By the name of ANNABEL LEE;
  And this maiden she lived with no other thought
    Than to love and be loved by me.

  _I_ was a child and _she_ was a child,
    In this kingdom by the sea:
  But we loved with a love that was more than love--
    I and my ANNABEL LEE;
  With a love that the winged seraphs of heaven
    Coveted her and me.

  And this was the reason that, long ago,
    In this kingdom by the sea,
  A wind blew out of a cloud, chilling
    My beautiful ANNABEL LEE;
  So that her highborn kinsmen came
    And bore her away from me,
  To shut her up in a sepulchre
    In this kingdom by the sea.

  The angels, not half so happy in heaven,
    Went envying her and me--
  Yes!--that was the reason (as all men know,
    In this kingdom by the sea)
  That the wind came out of the cloud by night,
    Chilling and killing my ANNABEL LEE.

  But our love it was stronger by far than the love
    Of those who were older than we--
    Of many far wiser than we--
  And neither the angels in heaven above,
    Nor the demons down under the sea,
  Can ever dissever my soul from the soul
    Of the beautiful ANNABEL LEE.

  For the moon never beams without bringing me dreams
    Of the beautiful ANNABEL LEE;
  And the stars never rise but I see the bright eyes
    Of the beautiful ANNABEL LEE;
  And so, all the night-tide, I lie down by the side
  Of my darling, my darling, my life and my bride,
    In her sepulchre there by the sea--
    In her tomb by the side of the sea.





       *       *       *       *       *





A VALENTINE.


  For her this rhyme is penned, whose luminous eyes,
    Brightly expressive as the twins of Leda,
  Shall find her own sweet name, that, nestling lies
    Upon the page, enwrapped from every reader.
  Search narrowly the lines!--they hold a treasure
    Divine--a talisman--an amulet
  That must be worn _at heart_. Search well the measure--
    The words--the syllables! Do not forget
  The trivialest point, or you may lose your labor!
    And yet there is in this no Gordian knot
  Which one might not undo without a sabre,
    If one could merely comprehend the plot.
  Enwritten upon the leaf where now are peering
    Eyes scintillating soul, there lie _perdus_
  Three eloquent words oft uttered in the hearing
    Of poets by poets--as the name is a poet's, too.
  Its letters, although naturally lying
    Like the knight Pinto--Mendez Ferdinando--
  Still form a synonym for Truth--Cease trying!
    You will not read the riddle, though you do the best you _can_ do.


1846.

[To discover the names in this and the following poem, read the first
letter of the first line in connection with the second letter of the
second line, the third letter of the third line, the fourth, of the
fourth and so on, to the end.]





       *       *       *       *       *





AN ENIGMA.


  "Seldom we find," says Solomon Don Dunce,
      "Half an idea in the profoundest sonnet.
    Through all the flimsy things we see at once
      As easily as through a Naples bonnet--
      Trash of all trash!--how _can_ a lady don it?
    Yet heavier far than your Petrarchan stuff--
    Owl-downy nonsense that the faintest puff
      Twirls into trunk-paper the while you con it."
    And, veritably, Sol is right enough.
    The general tuckermanities are arrant
    Bubbles--ephemeral and _so_ transparent--
      But _this is_, now--you may depend upon it--
    Stable, opaque, immortal--all by dint
    Of the dear names that lie concealed within't.



1847.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO MY MOTHER.


  Because I feel that, in the Heavens above,
    The angels, whispering to one another,
  Can find, among their burning terms of love,
    None so devotional as that of "Mother,"
  Therefore by that dear name I long have called you--
    You who are more than mother unto me,
  And fill my heart of hearts, where Death installed you,
    In setting my Virginia's spirit free.
  My mother--my own mother, who died early,
    Was but the mother of myself; but you
  Are mother to the one I loved so dearly,
    And thus are dearer than the mother I knew
  By that infinity with which my wife
    Was dearer to my soul than its soul-life.


1849.


[The above was addressed to the poet's mother-in-law, Mrs. Clemm.--Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





FOR ANNIE.


  Thank Heaven! the crisis--
    The danger is past,
  And the lingering illness
    Is over at last--
  And the fever called "Living"
    Is conquered at last.

  Sadly, I know,
    I am shorn of my strength,
  And no muscle I move
    As I lie at full length--
  But no matter!--I feel
    I am better at length.

  And I rest so composedly,
    Now in my bed,
  That any beholder
    Might fancy me dead--
  Might start at beholding me
    Thinking me dead.

  The moaning and groaning,
    The sighing and sobbing,
  Are quieted now,
    With that horrible throbbing
  At heart:--ah, that horrible,
    Horrible throbbing!

  The sickness--the nausea--
    The pitiless pain--
  Have ceased, with the fever
    That maddened my brain--
  With the fever called "Living"
    That burned in my brain.

  And oh! of all tortures
    _That_ torture the worst
  Has abated--the terrible
    Torture of thirst,
  For the naphthaline river
    Of Passion accurst:--
  I have drank of a water
    That quenches all thirst:--

  Of a water that flows,
    With a lullaby sound,
  From a spring but a very few
    Feet under ground--
  From a cavern not very far
    Down under ground.

  And ah! let it never
    Be foolishly said
  That my room it is gloomy
    And narrow my bed--
  For man never slept
    In a different bed;
  And, to _sleep_, you must slumber
    In just such a bed.

  My tantalized spirit
    Here blandly reposes,
  Forgetting, or never
    Regretting its roses--
  Its old agitations
    Of myrtles and roses:

  For now, while so quietly
    Lying, it fancies
  A holier odor
    About it, of pansies--
  A rosemary odor,
    Commingled with pansies--
  With rue and the beautiful
    Puritan pansies.

  And so it lies happily,
    Bathing in many
  A dream of the truth
    And the beauty of Annie--
  Drowned in a bath
    Of the tresses of Annie.

  She tenderly kissed me,
    She fondly caressed,
  And then I fell gently
    To sleep on her breast--
  Deeply to sleep
    From the heaven of her breast.

  When the light was extinguished,
    She covered me warm,
  And she prayed to the angels
    To keep me from harm--
  To the queen of the angels
    To shield me from harm.

  And I lie so composedly,
    Now in my bed
  (Knowing her love)
    That you fancy me dead--
  And I rest so contentedly,
    Now in my bed,
  (With her love at my breast)
    That you fancy me dead--
  That you shudder to look at me.
    Thinking me dead.

  But my heart it is brighter
    Than all of the many
  Stars in the sky,
    For it sparkles with Annie--
  It glows with the light
    Of the love of my Annie--
  With the thought of the light
    Of the eyes of my Annie.


1849.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO F--


  Beloved! amid the earnest woes
    That crowd around my earthly path--
  (Drear path, alas! where grows
  Not even one lonely rose)--
    My soul at least a solace hath
  In dreams of thee, and therein knows
  An Eden of bland repose.

  And thus thy memory is to me
    Like some enchanted far-off isle
  In some tumultuous sea--
  Some ocean throbbing far and free
    With storm--but where meanwhile
  Serenest skies continually
    Just o'er that one bright inland smile.


1845.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO FRANCES S. OSGOOD.


  Thou wouldst be loved?--then let thy heart
    From its present pathway part not;
  Being everything which now thou art,
    Be nothing which thou art not.
  So with the world thy gentle ways,
    Thy grace, thy more than beauty,
  Shall be an endless theme of praise.
    And love a simple duty.


1845.





       *       *       *       *       *





ELDORADO.


    Gaily bedight,
    A gallant knight,
  In sunshine and in shadow,
    Had journeyed long,
    Singing a song,
  In search of Eldorado.
    But he grew old--
    This knight so bold--
  And o'er his heart a shadow
    Fell as he found
    No spot of ground
  That looked like Eldorado.

  And, as his strength
    Failed him at length,
  He met a pilgrim shadow--
    "Shadow," said he,
    "Where can it be--
  This land of Eldorado?"

    "Over the Mountains
    Of the Moon,
  Down the Valley of the Shadow,
    Ride, boldly ride,"
    The shade replied,
  "If you seek for Eldorado!"


1849.





       *       *       *       *       *





EULALIE.


               I dwelt alone
               In a world of moan,
           And my soul was a stagnant tide,
  Till the fair and gentle Eulalie became my blushing bride--
  Till the yellow-haired young Eulalie became my smiling bride.
               Ah, less--less bright
               The stars of the night
           Than the eyes of the radiant girl!
               And never a flake
               That the vapor can make
           With the moon-tints of purple and pearl,
  Can vie with the modest Eulalie's most unregarded curl--
  Can compare with the bright-eyed Eulalie's most humble and careless
    curl.
               Now Doubt--now Pain
               Come never again,
           For her soul gives me sigh for sigh,
               And all day long
               Shines, bright and strong,
           Astart within the sky,
  While ever to her dear Eulalie upturns her matron eye--
  While ever to her young Eulalie upturns her violet eye.

1845.





       *       *       *       *       *





A DREAM WITHIN A DREAM.


  Take this kiss upon the brow!
  And, in parting from you now,
  Thus much let me avow--
  You are not wrong, who deem
  That my days have been a dream:
  Yet if hope has flown away
  In a night, or in a day,
  In a vision or in none,
  Is it therefore the less _gone_?
  _All_ that we see or seem
  Is but a dream within a dream.

  I stand amid the roar
  Of a surf-tormented shore,
  And I hold within my hand
  Grains of the golden sand--
  How few! yet how they creep
  Through my fingers to the deep
  While I weep--while I weep!
  O God! can I not grasp
  Them with a tighter clasp?
  O God! can I not save
  _One_ from the pitiless wave?
  Is _all_ that we see or seem
  But a dream within a dream?


1849.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO MARIE LOUISE (SHEW).


  Of all who hail thy presence as the morning--
  Of all to whom thine absence is the night--
  The blotting utterly from out high heaven
  The sacred sun--of all who, weeping, bless thee
  Hourly for hope--for life--ah, above all,
  For the resurrection of deep buried faith
  In truth, in virtue, in humanity--
  Of all who, on despair's unhallowed bed
  Lying down to die, have suddenly arisen
  At thy soft-murmured words, "Let there be light!"
  At thy soft-murmured words that were fulfilled
  In thy seraphic glancing of thine eyes--
  Of all who owe thee most, whose gratitude
  Nearest resembles worship,--oh, remember
  The truest, the most fervently devoted,
  And think that these weak lines are written by him--
  By him who, as he pens them, thrills to think
  His spirit is communing with an angel's.

1847.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO MARIE LOUISE (SHEW).


  Not long ago, the writer of these lines,
  In the mad pride of intellectuality,
  Maintained "the power of words"--denied that ever
  A thought arose within the human brain
  Beyond the utterance of the human tongue:
  And now, as if in mockery of that boast,
  Two words--two foreign soft dissyllables--
  Italian tones, made only to be murmured
  By angels dreaming in the moonlit "dew
  That hangs like chains of pearl on Hermon hill,"--
  Have stirred from out the abysses of his heart,
  Unthought-like thoughts that are the souls of thought,
  Richer, far wilder, far diviner visions
  Than even the seraph harper, Israfel,
  (Who has "the sweetest voice of all God's creatures,")
  Could hope to utter. And I! my spells are broken.
  The pen falls powerless from my shivering hand.
  With thy dear name as text, though hidden by thee,
  I cannot write--I cannot speak or think--
  Alas, I cannot feel; for 'tis not feeling,
  This standing motionless upon the golden
  Threshold of the wide-open gate of dreams,
  Gazing, entranced, adown the gorgeous vista,
  And thrilling as I see, upon the right,
  Upon the left, and all the way along,
  Amid empurpled vapors, far away
  To where the prospect terminates--_thee only_!





       *       *       *       *       *





THE CITY IN THE SEA.


  Lo! Death has reared himself a throne
  In a strange city lying alone
  Far down within the dim West,
  Where the good and the bad and the worst and the best
  Have gone to their eternal rest.
  There shrines and palaces and towers
  (Time-eaten towers and tremble not!)
  Resemble nothing that is ours.
  Around, by lifting winds forgot,
  Resignedly beneath the sky
  The melancholy waters lie.

  No rays from the holy Heaven come down
  On the long night-time of that town;
  But light from out the lurid sea
  Streams up the turrets silently--
  Gleams up the pinnacles far and free--
  Up domes--up spires--up kingly halls--
  Up fanes--up Babylon-like walls--
  Up shadowy long-forgotten bowers
  Of sculptured ivy and stone flowers--
  Up many and many a marvellous shrine
  Whose wreathed friezes intertwine
  The viol, the violet, and the vine.

  Resignedly beneath the sky
  The melancholy waters lie.
  So blend the turrets and shadows there
  That all seem pendulous in air,
  While from a proud tower in the town
  Death looks gigantically down.

  There open fanes and gaping graves
  Yawn level with the luminous waves;
  But not the riches there that lie
  In each idol's diamond eye--
  Not the gaily-jewelled dead
  Tempt the waters from their bed;
  For no ripples curl, alas!
  Along that wilderness of glass--
  No swellings tell that winds may be
  Upon some far-off happier sea--
  No heavings hint that winds have been
  On seas less hideously serene.

  But lo, a stir is in the air!
  The wave--there is a movement there!
  As if the towers had thrust aside,
  In slightly sinking, the dull tide--
  As if their tops had feebly given
  A void within the filmy Heaven.
  The waves have now a redder glow--
  The hours are breathing faint and low--
  And when, amid no earthly moans,
  Down, down that town shall settle hence,
  Hell, rising from a thousand thrones,
  Shall do it reverence.


1835?





       *       *       *       *       *





THE SLEEPER


  At midnight, in the month of June,
  I stand beneath the mystic moon.
  An opiate vapor, dewy, dim,
  Exhales from out her golden rim,
  And, softly dripping, drop by drop,
  Upon the quiet mountain top,
  Steals drowsily and musically
  Into the universal valley.
  The rosemary nods upon the grave;
  The lily lolls upon the wave;
  Wrapping the fog about its breast,
  The ruin moulders into rest;
  Looking like Lethe, see! the lake
  A conscious slumber seems to take,
  And would not, for the world, awake.
  All Beauty sleeps!--and lo! where lies
  (Her casement open to the skies)
  Irene, with her Destinies!

  Oh, lady bright! can it be right--
  This window open to the night!
  The wanton airs, from the tree-top,
  Laughingly through the lattice-drop--
  The bodiless airs, a wizard rout,
  Flit through thy chamber in and out,
  And wave the curtain canopy
  So fitfully--so fearfully--
  Above the closed and fringed lid
  'Neath which thy slumb'ring soul lies hid,
  That, o'er the floor and down the wall,
  Like ghosts the shadows rise and fall!
  Oh, lady dear, hast thou no fear?
  Why and what art thou dreaming here?
  Sure thou art come o'er far-off seas,
  A wonder to these garden trees!
  Strange is thy pallor! strange thy dress!
  Strange, above all, thy length of tress,
  And this all-solemn silentness!

  The lady sleeps! Oh, may her sleep
  Which is enduring, so be deep!
  Heaven have her in its sacred keep!
  This chamber changed for one more holy,
  This bed for one more melancholy,
  I pray to God that she may lie
  For ever with unopened eye,
  While the dim sheeted ghosts go by!

  My love, she sleeps! Oh, may her sleep,
  As it is lasting, so be deep;
  Soft may the worms about her creep!
  Far in the forest, dim and old,
  For her may some tall vault unfold--
  Some vault that oft hath flung its black
  And winged panels fluttering back,
  Triumphant, o'er the crested palls,
  Of her grand family funerals--
  Some sepulchre, remote, alone,
  Against whose portal she hath thrown,
  In childhood many an idle stone--
  Some tomb from out whose sounding door
  She ne'er shall force an echo more,
  Thrilling to think, poor child of sin!
  It was the dead who groaned within.


1845.





       *       *       *       *       *





BRIDAL BALLAD.


  The ring is on my hand,
    And the wreath is on my brow;
  Satins and jewels grand
  Are all at my command.
    And I am happy now.

  And my lord he loves me well;
    But, when first he breathed his vow,
  I felt my bosom swell--
  For the words rang as a knell,
  And the voice seemed _his_ who fell
  In the battle down the dell,
    And who is happy now.

  But he spoke to reassure me,
    And he kissed my pallid brow,
  While a reverie came o'er me,
  And to the churchyard bore me,
  And I sighed to him before me,
  Thinking him dead D'Elormie,
    "Oh, I am happy now!"

  And thus the words were spoken,
    And thus the plighted vow,
  And, though my faith be broken,
  And, though my heart be broken,
  Behold the golden keys
    That _proves_ me happy now!

  Would to God I could awaken
    For I dream I know not how,
  And my soul is sorely shaken
  Lest an evil step be taken,--
  Lest the dead who is forsaken
    May not be happy now.


1845.





       *       *       *       *       *






      The bells!--ah the bells!
      The little silver bells!
  How fairy-like a melody there floats
          From their throats--
          From their merry little throats--
          From the silver, tinkling throats
    Of the bells, bells, bells--
            Of the bells!

II.

      The bells!--ah, the bells!
      The heavy iron bells!
  How horrible a monody there floats
          From their throats--
          From their deep-toned throats--
          From their melancholy throats
          How I shudder at the notes
    Of the bells, bells, bells--
            Of the bells!



In the autumn of 1848 Poe added another line to this poem, and sent it
to the editor of the 'Union Magazine'. It was not published. So, in the
following February, the poet forwarded to the same periodical a much
enlarged and altered transcript. Three months having elapsed without
publication, another revision of the poem, similar to the current
version, was sent, and in the following October was published in the
'Union Magazine'.



       *       *       *       *       *



3.   ULALUME


This poem was first published in Colton's 'American Review' for December
1847, as "To----Ulalume: a Ballad." Being reprinted immediately in
the 'Home Journal', it was copied into various publications with the
name of the editor, N. P. Willis, appended, and was ascribed to him.
When first published, it contained the following additional stanza which
Poe subsequently, at the suggestion of Mrs. Whitman wisely suppressed:


  Said we then--the two, then--"Ah, can it
      Have been that the woodlandish ghouls--
      The pitiful, the merciful ghouls--
  To bar up our path and to ban it
      From the secret that lies in these wolds--
  Had drawn up the spectre of a planet
      From the limbo of lunary souls--
  This sinfully scintillant planet
      From the Hell of the planetary souls?"



       *       *       *       *       *



4.   TO HELEN


"To Helen" (Mrs. S. Helen Whitman) was not published Until November
1848, although written several months earlier. It first appeared in the
'Union Magazine' and with the omission, contrary to the knowledge or
desire of Poe, of the line, "Oh, God! oh, Heaven--how my heart beats in
coupling those two words".



       *       *       *       *       *



5.   ANNABEL LEE


"Annabel Lee" was written early in 1849, and is evidently an expression
of the poet's undying love for his deceased bride although at least one
of his lady admirers deemed it a response to her admiration. Poe sent a
copy of the ballad to the 'Union Magazine', in which publication it
appeared in January 1850, three months after the author's death. Whilst
suffering from "hope deferred" as to its fate, Poe presented a copy of
"Annabel Lee" to the editor of the 'Southern Literary Messenger', who
published it in the November number of his periodical, a month after
Poe's death. In the meantime the poet's own copy, left among his papers,
passed into the hands of the person engaged to edit his works, and he
quoted the poem in an obituary of Poe in the New York 'Tribune', before
any one else had an opportunity of publishing it.



       *       *       *       *       *



6.   A VALENTINE


"A Valentine," one of three poems addressed to Mrs. Osgood, appears to
have been written early in 1846.



       *       *       *       *       *



7.   AN ENIGMA


"An Enigma," addressed to Mrs. Sarah Anna Lewig ("Stella"), was sent to
that lady in a letter, in November 1847, and the following March
appeared in Sartain's 'Union Magazine'.



*       *       *       *       *



8.   TO MY MOTHER


The sonnet, "To My Mother" (Maria Clemm), was sent for publication to
the short-lived 'Flag of our Union', early in 1849, but does not appear
to have been issued until after its author's death, when it appeared in
the 'Leaflets of Memory' for 1850.



*       *       *       *       *



9.   FOR ANNIE


"For Annie" was first published in the 'Flag of our Union', in the
spring of 1849. Poe, annoyed at some misprints in this issue, shortly
afterwards caused a corrected copy to be inserted in the 'Home Journal'.



*       *       *       *       *



10.   TO F----


"To F----" (Frances Sargeant Osgood) appeared in the 'Broadway Journal'
for April 1845. These lines are but slightly varied from those inscribed
"To Mary," in the 'Southern Literary Messenger' for July 1835, and
subsequently republished, with the two stanzas transposed, in 'Graham's
Magazine' for March 1842, as "To One Departed."



*       *       *       *       *



11.   TO FRANCES S. OSGOOD


"To F--s S. O--d," a portion of the poet's triune tribute to Mrs.
Osgood, was published in the 'Broadway Journal' for September 1845. The
earliest version of these lines appeared in the 'Southern Literary
Messenger' for September 1835, as "Lines written in an Album," and was
addressed to Eliza White, the proprietor's daughter. Slightly revised,
the poem reappeared in Burton's 'Gentleman's Magazine' for August, 1839,
as "To----."



*       *       *       *       *



12.   ELDORADO


Although "Eldorado" was published during Poe's lifetime, in 1849, in the
'Flag of our Union', it does not appear to have ever received the
author's finishing touches.



*       *       *       *       *



13.   EULALIE


"Eulalie--a Song" first appears in Colton's 'American Review' for July,
1845.



*       *       *       *       *



14.   A DREAM WITHIN A DREAM


"A Dream within a Dream" does not appear to have been published as a
separate poem during its author's lifetime. A portion of it was
contained, in 1829, in the piece beginning, "Should my early life seem,"
and in 1831 some few lines of it were used as a conclusion to
"Tamerlane." In 1849 the poet sent a friend all but the first nine lines
of the piece as a separate poem, headed "For Annie."



*       *       *       *       *



15   TO MARIE LOUISE (SHEW)


"To M----L----S----," addressed to Mrs. Marie Louise Shew, was written
in February 1847, and published shortly afterwards. In the first
posthumous collection of Poe's poems these lines were, for some reason,
included in the "Poems written in Youth," and amongst those poems they
have hitherto been included.



*       *       *       *       *



16.  (2)  TO MARIE LOUISE (SHEW)


"To----," a second piece addressed to Mrs. Shew, and written in 1848,
was also first published, but in a somewhat faulty form, in the above
named posthumous collection.



*       *       *       *       *



17.   THE CITY IN THE SEA


Under the title of "The Doomed City" the initial version of "The City in
the Sea" appeared in the 1831 volume of Poems by Poe: it reappeared as
"The City of Sin," in the 'Southern Literary Messenger' for August 1835,
whilst the present draft of it first appeared in Colton's 'American
Review' for April, 1845.



*       *       *       *       *



18.   THE SLEEPER


As "Irene," the earliest known version of "The Sleeper," appeared in the
1831 volume. It reappeared in the 'Literary Messenger' for May 1836,
and, in its present form, in the 'Broadway Journal' for May 1845.



*       *       *       *       *



19.   THE BRIDAL BALLAD


"The Bridal Ballad" is first discoverable in the 'Southern Literary
Messenger' for January 1837, and, in its present compressed and revised
form, was reprinted in the 'Broadway Journal' for August, 1845.





       *       *       *       *       *





                         POEMS OF MANHOOD.





       *       *       *       *       *





LENORE.


  Ah, broken is the golden bowl! the spirit flown forever!
  Let the bell toll!--a saintly soul floats on the Stygian river.
  And, Guy de Vere, hast _thou_ no tear?--weep now or never more!
  See! on yon drear and rigid bier low lies thy love, Lenore!
  Come! let the burial rite be read--the funeral song be sung!--
  An anthem for the queenliest dead that ever died so young--
  A dirge for her, the doubly dead in that she died so young.

  "Wretches! ye loved her for her wealth and hated her for her pride,
  And when she fell in feeble health, ye blessed her--that she died!
  How _shall_ the ritual, then, be read?--the requiem how be sung
  By you--by yours, the evil eye,--by yours, the slanderous tongue
  That did to death the innocence that died, and died so young?"

  _Peccavimus;_ but rave not thus! and let a Sabbath song
  Go up to God so solemnly the dead may feel no wrong!
  The sweet Lenore hath "gone before," with Hope, that flew beside,
  Leaving thee wild for the dear child that should have been thy bride--
  For her, the fair and _dbonnaire_, that now so lowly lies,
  The life upon her yellow hair but not within her eyes--
  The life still there, upon her hair--the death upon her eyes.

  "Avaunt! to-night my heart is light. No dirge will I upraise,
  But waft the angel on her flight with a pan of old days!
  Let _no_ bell toll!--lest her sweet soul, amid its hallowed mirth,
  Should catch the note, as it doth float up from the damned Earth.
  To friends above, from fiends below, the indignant ghost is riven--
  From Hell unto a high estate far up within the Heaven--
  From grief and groan to a golden throne beside the King of Heaven."


1844.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO ONE IN PARADISE,


  Thou wast that all to me, love,
    For which my soul did pine--
  A green isle in the sea, love,
    A fountain and a shrine,
  All wreathed with fairy fruits and flowers,
  And all the flowers were mine.

  Ah, dream too bright to last!
    Ah, starry Hope! that didst arise
  But to be overcast!
    A voice from out the Future cries,
  "On! on!"--but o'er the Past
    (Dim gulf!) my spirit hovering lies
  Mute, motionless, aghast!

  For, alas! alas! with me
    The light of Life is o'er!
  "No more--no more--no more"--
  (Such language holds the solemn sea
    To the sands upon the shore)
  Shall bloom the thunder-blasted tree,
    Or the stricken eagle soar!

  And all my days are trances,
    And all my nightly dreams
  Are where thy dark eye glances,
    And where thy footstep gleams--
  In what ethereal dances,
    By what eternal streams!

  Alas! for that accursed time
    They bore thee o'er the billow,
  From love to titled age and crime,
    And an unholy pillow!
  From me, and from our misty clime,
    Where weeps the silver willow!


1835





       *       *       *       *       *





THE COLISEUM.


  Type of the antique Rome! Rich reliquary
  Of lofty contemplation left to Time
  By buried centuries of pomp and power!
  At length--at length--after so many days
  Of weary pilgrimage and burning thirst,
  (Thirst for the springs of lore that in thee lie,)
  I kneel, an altered and an humble man,
  Amid thy shadows, and so drink within
  My very soul thy grandeur, gloom, and glory!

  Vastness! and Age! and Memories of Eld!
  Silence! and Desolation! and dim Night!
  I feel ye now--I feel ye in your strength--
  O spells more sure than e'er Judan king
  Taught in the gardens of Gethsemane!
  O charms more potent than the rapt Chaldee
  Ever drew down from out the quiet stars!

  Here, where a hero fell, a column falls!
  Here, where the mimic eagle glared in gold,
  A midnight vigil holds the swarthy bat!
  Here, where the dames of Rome their gilded hair
  Waved to the wind, now wave the reed and thistle!
  Here, where on golden throne the monarch lolled,
  Glides, spectre-like, unto his marble home,
  Lit by the wan light of the horned moon,
  The swift and silent lizard of the stones!

  But stay! these walls--these ivy-clad arcades--
  These mouldering plinths--these sad and blackened shafts--
  These vague entablatures--this crumbling frieze--
  These shattered cornices--this wreck--this ruin--
  These stones--alas! these gray stones--are they all--
  All of the famed, and the colossal left
  By the corrosive Hours to Fate and me?

  "Not all"--the Echoes answer me--"not all!
  Prophetic sounds and loud, arise forever
  From us, and from all Ruin, unto the wise,
  As melody from Memnon to the Sun.
  We rule the hearts of mightiest men--we rule
  With a despotic sway all giant minds.
  We are not impotent--we pallid stones.
  Not all our power is gone--not all our fame--
  Not all the magic of our high renown--
  Not all the wonder that encircles us--
  Not all the mysteries that in us lie--
  Not all the memories that hang upon
  And cling around about us as a garment,
  Clothing us in a robe of more than glory."


1838.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE HAUNTED PALACE.


  In the greenest of our valleys
    By good angels tenanted,
  Once a fair and stately palace--
    Radiant palace--reared its head.
  In the monarch Thought's dominion--
    It stood there!
  Never seraph spread a pinion
    Over fabric half so fair!

  Banners yellow, glorious, golden,
    On its roof did float and flow,
  (This--all this--was in the olden
    Time long ago),
  And every gentle air that dallied,
    In that sweet day,
  Along the ramparts plumed and pallid,
    A winged odor went away.

  Wanderers in that happy valley,
    Through two luminous windows, saw
  Spirits moving musically,
    To a lute's well-tund law,
  Bound about a throne where, sitting
    (Porphyrogene!)
  In state his glory well befitting,
    The ruler of the realm was seen.

  And all with pearl and ruby glowing
    Was the fair palace door,
  Through which came flowing, flowing, flowing,
    And sparkling evermore,
  A troop of Echoes, whose sweet duty
    Was but to sing,
  In voices of surpassing beauty,
    The wit and wisdom of their king.

  But evil things, in robes of sorrow,
    Assailed the monarch's high estate.
  (Ah, let us mourn!--for never morrow
    Shall dawn upon him desolate !)
  And round about his home the glory
    That blushed and bloomed,
  Is but a dim-remembered story
    Of the old time entombed.

  And travellers, now, within that valley,
    Through the red-litten windows see
  Vast forms, that move fantastically
    To a discordant melody,
    While, like a ghastly rapid river,
    Through the pale door
  A hideous throng rush out forever
    And laugh--but smile no more.


1838.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE CONQUEROR WORM.


  Lo! 'tis a gala night
    Within the lonesome latter years!
  An angel throng, bewinged, bedight
    In veils, and drowned in tears,
  Sit in a theatre, to see
    A play of hopes and fears,
  While the orchestra breathes fitfully
    The music of the spheres.

  Mimes, in the form of God on high,
    Mutter and mumble low,
  And hither and thither fly--
    Mere puppets they, who come and go
  At bidding of vast formless things
    That shift the scenery to and fro,
  Flapping from out their Condor wings
    Invisible Wo!

  That motley drama--oh, be sure
    It shall not be forgot!
  With its Phantom chased for evermore,
    By a crowd that seize it not,
  Through a circle that ever returneth in
    To the self-same spot,
  And much of Madness, and more of Sin,
    And Horror the soul of the plot.

  But see, amid the mimic rout
    A crawling shape intrude!
  A blood-red thing that writhes from out
    The scenic solitude!
  It writhes!--it writhes!--with mortal pangs
    The mimes become its food,
  And the angels sob at vermin fangs
    In human gore imbued.

  Out--out are the lights--out all!
    And, over each quivering form,
  The curtain, a funeral pall,
    Comes down with the rush of a storm,
  And the angels, all pallid and wan,
    Uprising, unveiling, affirm
  That the play is the tragedy, "Man,"
    And its hero the Conqueror Worm.


1838





       *       *       *       *       *





SILENCE.


  There are some qualities--some incorporate things,
    That have a double life, which thus is made
  A type of that twin entity which springs
    From matter and light, evinced in solid and shade.
  There is a twofold _Silence_--sea and shore--
    Body and soul. One dwells in lonely places,
    Newly with grass o'ergrown; some solemn graces,
  Some human memories and tearful lore,
  Render him terrorless: his name's "No More."
  He is the corporate Silence: dread him not!
    No power hath he of evil in himself;
  But should some urgent fate (untimely lot!)
    Bring thee to meet his shadow (nameless elf,
  That haunteth the lone regions where hath trod
  No foot of man), commend thyself to God!


1840





       *       *       *       *       *





DREAMLAND.


  By a route obscure and lonely,
  Haunted by ill angels only,
  Where an Eidolon, named NIGHT,
  On a black throne reigns upright,
  I have reached these lands but newly
  From an ultimate dim Thule--
  From a wild weird clime that lieth, sublime,
    Out of SPACE--out of TIME.

  Bottomless vales and boundless floods,
  And chasms, and caves, and Titan woods,
  With forms that no man can discover
  For the dews that drip all over;
  Mountains toppling evermore
  Into seas without a shore;
  Seas that restlessly aspire,
  Surging, unto skies of fire;
  Lakes that endlessly outspread
  Their lone waters--lone and dead,
  Their still waters--still and chilly
  With the snows of the lolling lily.

  By the lakes that thus outspread
  Their lone waters, lone and dead,--
  Their sad waters, sad and chilly
  With the snows of the lolling lily,--

  By the mountains--near the river
  Murmuring lowly, murmuring ever,--
  By the gray woods,--by the swamp
  Where the toad and the newt encamp,--
  By the dismal tarns and pools
    Where dwell the Ghouls,--
  By each spot the most unholy--
  In each nook most melancholy,--

  There the traveller meets aghast
  Sheeted Memories of the past--
  Shrouded forms that start and sigh
  As they pass the wanderer by--
  White-robed forms of friends long given,
  In agony, to the Earth--and Heaven.

  For the heart whose woes are legion
  'Tis a peaceful, soothing region--
  For the spirit that walks in shadow
  'Tis--oh, 'tis an Eldorado!
  But the traveller, travelling through it,
  May not--dare not openly view it;
  Never its mysteries are exposed
  To the weak human eye unclosed;
  So wills its King, who hath forbid
  The uplifting of the fringed lid;
  And thus the sad Soul that here passes
  Beholds it but through darkened glasses.

  By a route obscure and lonely,
  Haunted by ill angels only.

  Where an Eidolon, named NIGHT,
  On a black throne reigns upright,
  I have wandered home but newly
  From this ultimate dim Thule.


1844





       *       *       *       *       *





TO ZANTE.


  Fair isle, that from the fairest of all flowers,
    Thy gentlest of all gentle names dost take!
  How many memories of what radiant hours
    At sight of thee and thine at once awake!
  How many scenes of what departed bliss!
    How many thoughts of what entombed hopes!
  How many visions of a maiden that is
    No more--no more upon thy verdant slopes!

  _No more!_ alas, that magical sad sound
    Transforming all! Thy charms shall please _no more_--
  Thy memory _no more!_ Accursed ground
    Henceforward I hold thy flower-enamelled shore,
  O hyacinthine isle! O purple Zante!
    "Isola d'oro! Fior di Levante!"


1887.





       *       *       *       *       *





HYMN.


  At morn--at noon--at twilight dim--
  Maria! thou hast heard my hymn!
  In joy and wo--in good and ill--
  Mother of God, be with me still!
  When the Hours flew brightly by,
  And not a cloud obscured the sky,
  My soul, lest it should truant be,
  Thy grace did guide to thine and thee
  Now, when storms of Fate o'ercast
  Darkly my Present and my Past,
  Let my future radiant shine
  With sweet hopes of thee and thine!


1885.





       *       *       *       *       *






21.   TO ONE IN PARADISE


"To One in Paradise" was included originally in "The Visionary" (a tale
now known as "The Assignation"), in July, 1835, and appeared as a
separate poem entitled "To Ianthe in Heaven," in Burton's 'Gentleman's
Magazine' for July, 1839. The fifth stanza is now added, for the first
time, to the piece.



*       *       *       *       *



22.   THE COLISEUM


"The Coliseum" appeared in the Baltimore 'Saturday Visitor' ('sic') in
1833, and was republished in the 'Southern Literary Messenger' for
August 1835, as "A Prize Poem."



*       *       *       *       *



23.   THE HAUNTED PALACE


"The Haunted Palace" originally issued in the Baltimore 'American
Museum' for April, 1888, was subsequently embodied in that much admired
tale, "The Fall of the House of Usher," and published in it in Burton's
'Gentleman's Magazine' for September, 1839. It reappeared in that as a
separate poem in the 1845 edition of Poe's poems.



*       *       *       *       *



24.   THE CONQUEROR WORM


"The Conqueror Worm," then contained in Poe's favorite tale of "Ligeia,"
was first published in the 'American Museum' for September, 1838. As a
separate poem, it reappeared in 'Graham's Magazine' for January, 1843.



*       *       *       *       *



25.   SILENCE


The sonnet, "Silence," was originally published in Burton's 'Gentleman's
Magazine' for April, 1840.



*       *       *       *       *



26.   DREAMLAND


The first known publication of "Dreamland" was in 'Graham's Magazine'
for June, 1844.



*       *       *       *       *



37.   TO ZANTE


The "Sonnet to Zante" is not discoverable earlier than January, 1837,
when it appeared in the 'Southern Literary Messenger'.



*       *       *       *       *



28.   HYMN


The initial version of the "Catholic Hymn" was contained in the story of
"Morella," and published in the 'Southern Literary Messenger' for April,
1885. The lines as they now stand, and with their present title, were
first published in the 'Broadway Journal for August', 1845.





*       *       *       *       *





                        SCENES FROM "POLITIAN."

                         AN UNPUBLISHED DRAMA.


I.

ROME.--A Hall in a Palace. ALESSANDRA and CASTIGLIONE

_Alessandra_.     Thou art sad, Castiglione.

_Castiglione_.    Sad!--not I.
                  Oh, I'm the happiest, happiest man in Rome!
                  A few days more, thou knowest, my Alessandra,
                  Will make thee mine. Oh, I am very happy!

_Aless_.          Methinks thou hast a singular way of showing
                  Thy happiness--what ails thee, cousin of mine?
                  Why didst thou sigh so deeply?

_Cas_.            Did I sigh?
                  I was not conscious of it. It is a fashion,
                  A silly--a most silly fashion I have
                  When I am _very_ happy. Did I sigh? (_sighing._)

_Aless_.          Thou didst. Thou art not well. Thou hast indulged
                  Too much of late, and I am vexed to see it.
                  Late hours and wine, Castiglione,--these
                  Will ruin thee! thou art already altered--
                  Thy looks are haggard--nothing so wears away
                  The constitution as late hours and wine.

_Cas. (musing_ ). Nothing, fair cousin, nothing--
                  Not even deep sorrow--
                  Wears it away like evil hours and wine.
                  I will amend.

_Aless_.          Do it! I would have thee drop
                  Thy riotous company, too--fellows low born
                  Ill suit the like of old Di Broglio's heir
                  And Alessandra's husband.

_Cas_.            I will drop them.

_Aless_.          Thou wilt--thou must. Attend thou also more
                  To thy dress and equipage--they are over plain
                  For thy lofty rank and fashion--much depends
                  Upon appearances.

_Cas_.            I'll see to it.

_Aless_.          Then see to it!--pay more attention, sir,
                  To a becoming carriage--much thou wantest
                  In dignity.

_Cas_.            Much, much, oh, much I want
                  In proper dignity.

_Aless.
(haughtily_).     Thou mockest me, sir!

_Cos.
(abstractedly_).  Sweet, gentle Lalage!

_Aless_.          Heard I aright?
                  I speak to him--he speaks of Lalage?
                  Sir Count!
         (_places her hand on his shoulder_)
                             what art thou dreaming?
                  He's not well!
                  What ails thee, sir?

_Cas.(starting_). Cousin! fair cousin!--madam!
                  I crave thy pardon--indeed I am not well--
                  Your hand from off my shoulder, if you please.
                  This air is most oppressive!--Madam--the Duke!

_Enter Di Broglio_.

_Di Broglio_.     My son, I've news for thee!--hey!
                 --what's the matter?
          (_observing Alessandra_).
                  I' the pouts? Kiss her, Castiglione! kiss her,
                  You dog! and make it up, I say, this minute!
                  I've news for you both. Politian is expected
                  Hourly in Rome--Politian, Earl of Leicester!
                  We'll have him at the wedding. 'Tis his first visit
                  To the imperial city.

_Aless_.          What! Politian
                  Of Britain, Earl of Leicester?

_Di Brog_.        The same, my love.
                  We'll have him at the wedding. A man quite young
                  In years, but gray in fame. I have not seen him,
                  But Rumor speaks of him as of a prodigy
                  Pre-eminent in arts, and arms, and wealth,
                  And high descent. We'll have him at the wedding.

_Aless_.          I have heard much of this Politian.
                  Gay, volatile and giddy--is he not,
                  And little given to thinking?

_Di Brog_.        Far from it, love.
                  No branch, they say, of all philosophy
                  So deep abstruse he has not mastered it.
                  Learned as few are learned.

_Aless_.          'Tis very strange!
                  I have known men have seen Politian
                  And sought his company. They speak of him
                  As of one who entered madly into life,
                  Drinking the cup of pleasure to the dregs.

_Cas_.            Ridiculous! Now _I_ have seen Politian
                  And know him well--nor learned nor mirthful he.
                  He is a dreamer, and shut out
                  From common passions.

_Di Brog_.        Children, we disagree.
                  Let us go forth and taste the fragrant air
                  Of the garden. Did I dream, or did I hear
                  Politian was a _melancholy_ man?

                  (_Exeunt._)




II.

ROME.--A Lady's Apartment, with a window open and looking into a garden.
LALAGE, in deep mourning, reading at a table on which lie some books and
a hand-mirror. In the background JACINTA (a servant maid) leans
carelessly upon a chair.


_Lalage_.         Jacinta! is it thou?

_Jacinta
(pertly_).        Yes, ma'am, I'm here.

_Lal_.            I did not know, Jacinta, you were in waiting.
                  Sit down!--let not my presence trouble you--
                  Sit down!--for I am humble, most humble.

_Jac. (aside_).   'Tis time.

(_Jacinta seats herself in a side-long manner upon the chair, resting
her elbows upon the back, and regarding her mistress with a contemptuous
look. Lalage continues to read._)

_Lal_.            "It in another climate, so he said,
                  Bore a bright golden flower, but not i' this soil!"

           (_pauses--turns over some leaves and resumes_.)

                  "No lingering winters there, nor snow, nor shower--
                  But Ocean ever to refresh mankind
                  Breathes the shrill spirit of the western wind"
                  Oh, beautiful!--most beautiful!--how like
                  To what my fevered soul doth dream of Heaven!
                  O happy land! (_pauses_) She died!--the maiden died!
                  O still more happy maiden who couldst die!
                  Jacinta!

          (_Jacinta returns no answer, and Lalage presently resumes_.)

                  Again!--a similar tale
                  Told of a beauteous dame beyond the sea!
                  Thus speaketh one Ferdinand in the words of the play--
                  "She died full young"--one Bossola answers him--
                  "I think not so--her infelicity
                  Seemed to have years too many"--Ah, luckless lady!
                  Jacinta! (_still no answer_.)
                  Here's a far sterner story--
                  But like--oh, very like in its despair--
                  Of that Egyptian queen, winning so easily
                  A thousand hearts--losing at length her own.
                  She died. Thus endeth the history--and her maids
                  Lean over her and keep--two gentle maids
                  With gentle names--Eiros and Charmion!
                  Rainbow and Dove!--Jacinta!

_Jac_.
(_pettishly_).    Madam, what is it?

_Lal_.            Wilt thou, my good Jacinta, be so kind
                  As go down in the library and bring me
                  The Holy Evangelists?

_Jac_.            Pshaw!

                  (_Exit_)

_Lal_.            If there be balm
                  For the wounded spirit in Gilead, it is there!
                  Dew in the night time of my bitter trouble
                  Will there be found--"dew sweeter far than that
                  Which hangs like chains of pearl on Hermon hill."

(_re-enter Jacinta, and throws a volume on the table_.)

                  There, ma'am, 's the book.
   (_aside_.)     Indeed she is very troublesome.

_Lal_.
(_astonished_).   What didst thou say, Jacinta?
                  Have I done aught
                  To grieve thee or to vex thee?--I am sorry.
                  For thou hast served me long and ever been
                  Trustworthy and respectful.
              (_resumes her reading_.)

_Jac_. (_aside_.) I can't believe
                  She has any more jewels--no--no--she gave me all.

_Lal_.            What didst thou say, Jacinta? Now I bethink me
                  Thou hast not spoken lately of thy wedding.
                  How fares good Ugo?--and when is it to be?
                  Can I do aught?--is there no further aid
                  Thou needest, Jacinta?

_Jac_. (_aside_.) Is there no _further_ aid!
                  That's meant for me.  I'm sure, madam, you need not
                  Be always throwing those jewels in my teeth.

_Lal_.            Jewels! Jacinta,--now indeed, Jacinta,
                  I thought not of the jewels.

_Jac_.            Oh, perhaps not!
                  But then I might have sworn it. After all,
                  There's Ugo says the ring is only paste,
                  For he's sure the Count Castiglione never
                  Would have given a real diamond to such as you;
                  And at the best I'm certain, madam, you cannot
                  Have use for jewels _now_. But I might have sworn it.

                  (_Exit_)

(_Lalage bursts into tears and leans her head upon the table--after a
short pause raises it_.)

_Lal_.            Poor Lalage!--and is it come to this?
                  Thy servant maid!--but courage!--'tis but a viper
                  Whom thou hast cherished to sting thee to the soul!
                  (_taking up the mirror_)
                  Ha! here at least's a friend--too much a friend
                  In earlier days--a friend will not deceive thee.
                  Fair mirror and true! now tell me (for thou canst)
                  A tale--a pretty tale--and heed thou not
                  Though it be rife with woe. It answers me.
                  It speaks of sunken eyes, and wasted cheeks,
                  And beauty long deceased--remembers me,
                  Of Joy departed--Hope, the Seraph Hope,
                  Inurned and entombed!--now, in a tone
                  Low, sad, and solemn, but most audible,
                  Whispers of early grave untimely yawning
                  For ruined maid. Fair mirror and true!--thou liest not!
                  _Thou_ hast no end to gain--no heart to break--
                  Castiglione lied who said he loved----
                  Thou true--he false!--false!--false!

(_While she speaks, a monk enters her apartment and approaches
unobserved_)

_Monk_.           Refuge thou hast,
                  Sweet daughter! in Heaven. Think of eternal things!
                  Give up thy soul to penitence, and pray!

_Lal.
(arising hurriedly_). I _cannot_ pray!--My soul is at war with God!
                  The frightful sounds of merriment below;
                  Disturb my senses--go! I cannot pray--
                  The sweet airs from the garden worry me!
                  Thy presence grieves me--go!--thy priestly raiment
                  Fills me with dread--thy ebony crucifix
                  With horror and awe!

_Monk_.           Think of thy precious soul!

_Lal_.            Think of my early days!--think of my father
                  And mother in Heaven! think of our quiet home,
                  And the rivulet that ran before the door!
                  Think of my little sisters!--think of them!
                  And think of me!--think of my trusting love
                  And confidence--his vows--my ruin--think--think
                  Of my unspeakable misery!----begone!
                  Yet stay! yet stay!--what was it thou saidst of prayer
                  And penitence? Didst thou not speak of faith
                  And vows before the throne?

_Monk_.           I did.

_Lal_.            'Tis well.
                  There _is_ a vow 'twere fitting should be made--
                  A sacred vow, imperative and urgent,
                  A solemn vow!

_Monk_.           Daughter, this zeal is well!

_Lal_.            Father, this zeal is anything but well!
                  Hast thou a crucifix fit for this thing?
                  A crucifix whereon to register
                  This sacred vow? (_he hands her his own_.)
                  Not that--Oh! no!--no!--no (_shuddering_.)
                  Not that! Not that!--I tell thee, holy man,
                  Thy raiments and thy ebony cross affright me!
                  Stand back! I have a crucifix myself,--
                  _I_ have a crucifix! Methinks 'twere fitting
                  The deed--the vow--the symbol of the deed--
                  And the deed's register should tally, father!
         (_draws a cross-handled dagger and raises it on high_.)
                  Behold the cross wherewith a vow like mine
                  Is written in heaven!

_Monk_.           Thy words are madness, daughter,
                  And speak a purpose unholy--thy lips are livid--
                  Thine eyes are wild--tempt not the wrath divine!
                  Pause ere too late!--oh, be not--be not rash!
                  Swear not the oath--oh, swear it not!

_Lal_.            'Tis sworn!




III.

An Apartment in a Palace. POLITIAN and BALDAZZAR.


_Baldazzar_.      Arouse thee now, Politian!
                  Thou must not--nay indeed, indeed, thou shalt not
                  Give way unto these humors. Be thyself!
                  Shake off the idle fancies that beset thee
                  And live, for now thou diest!

_Politian_.       Not so, Baldazzar!
                  _Surely_ I live.

_Bal_.            Politian, it doth grieve me
                  To see thee thus!

_Pol_.            Baldazzar, it doth grieve me
                  To give thee cause for grief, my honored friend.
                  Command me, sir! what wouldst thou have me do?
                  At thy behest I will shake off that nature
                  Which from my forefathers I did inherit,
                  Which with my mother's milk I did imbibe,
                  And be no more Politian, but some other.
                  Command me, sir!

_Bal_.            To the field then--to the field--
                  To the senate or the field.

_Pol_.            Alas! alas!
                  There is an imp would follow me even there!
                  There is an imp _hath_ followed me even there!
                  There is--what voice was that?

_Bal_.            I heard it not.
                  I heard not any voice except thine own,
                  And the echo of thine own.

_Pol_.            Then I but dreamed.

_Bal_.            Give not thy soul to dreams: the camp--the court
                  Befit thee--Fame awaits thee--Glory calls--
                  And her the trumpet-tongued thou wilt not hear
                  In hearkening to imaginary sounds
                  And phantom voices.

_Pol_.            It _is_ a phantom voice!
                  Didst thou not hear it _then_?

_Bal_             I heard it not.

_Pol_.            Thou heardst it not!--Baldazzar, speak no more
                  To me, Politian, of thy camps and courts.
                  Oh! I am sick, sick, sick, even unto death,
                  Of the hollow and high-sounding vanities
                  Of the populous Earth! Bear with me yet awhile
                  We have been boys together--school-fellows--
                  And now are friends--yet shall not be so long--
                  For in the Eternal City thou shalt do me
                  A kind and gentle office, and a Power--
                  A Power august, benignant, and supreme--
                  Shall then absolve thee of all further duties
                  Unto thy friend.

_Bal_.            Thou speakest a fearful riddle
                  I _will_ not understand.

_Pol_.            Yet now as Fate
                  Approaches, and the Hours are breathing low,
                  The sands of Time are changed to golden grains,
                  And dazzle me, Baldazzar. Alas! alas!
                  I _cannot_ die, having within my heart
                  So keen a relish for the beautiful
                  As hath been kindled within it. Methinks the air
                  Is balmier now than it was wont to be--
                  Rich melodies are floating in the winds--
                  A rarer loveliness bedecks the earth--
                  And with a holier lustre the quiet moon
                  Sitteth in Heaven.--Hist! hist! thou canst not say
                  Thou hearest not _now_, Baldazzar?

_Bal_.            Indeed I hear not.

_Pol_.            Not hear it!--listen--now--listen!--the faintest sound
                  And yet the sweetest that ear ever heard!
                  A lady's voice!--and sorrow in the tone!
                  Baldazzar, it oppresses me like a spell!
                  Again!--again!--how solemnly it falls
                  Into my heart of hearts! that eloquent voice
                  Surely I never heard--yet it were well
                  Had I _but_ heard it with its thrilling tones
                  In earlier days!

_Bal_.            I myself hear it now.
                  Be still!--the voice, if I mistake not greatly,
                  Proceeds from younder lattice--which you may see
                  Very plainly through the window--it belongs,
                  Does it not? unto this palace of the Duke.
                  The singer is undoubtedly beneath
                  The roof of his Excellency--and perhaps
                  Is even that Alessandra of whom he spoke
                  As the betrothed of Castiglione,
                  His son and heir.

_Pol_.            Be still!--it comes again!

_Voice_
(_very faintly_). "And is thy heart so strong [1]
                  As for to leave me thus,
                  That have loved thee so long,
                  In wealth and woe among?
                  And is thy heart so strong
                  As for to leave me thus?
                  Say nay! say nay!"


_Bal_.            The song is English, and I oft have heard it
                  In merry England--never so plaintively--
                  Hist! hist! it comes again!

_Voice
(more loudly_).   "Is it so strong
                  As for to leave me thus,
                  That have loved thee so long,
                  In wealth and woe among?
                  And is thy heart so strong
                  As for to leave me thus?
                  Say nay! say nay!"

_Bal_.            'Tis hushed and all is still!

_Pol_.            All _is not_ still.

_Bal_.            Let us go down.

_Pol_.            Go down, Baldazzar, go!

_Bal_.            The hour is growing late--the Duke awaits us,--
                  Thy presence is expected in the hall
                  Below. What ails thee, Earl Politian?

_Voice_
(_distinctly_).   "Who have loved thee so long,
                  In wealth and woe among,
                  And is thy heart so strong?
                  Say nay! say nay!"

_Bal_.            Let us descend!--'tis time. Politian, give
                  These fancies to the wind. Remember, pray,
                  Your bearing lately savored much of rudeness
                  Unto the Duke. Arouse thee! and remember!

_Pol_.            Remember? I do. Lead on! I _do_ remember.
               (_going_).
                  Let us descend. Believe me I would give,
                  Freely would give the broad lands of my earldom
                  To look upon the face hidden by yon lattice--
                  "To gaze upon that veiled face, and hear
                  Once more that silent tongue."

_Bal_.            Let me beg you, sir,
                  Descend with me--the Duke may be offended.
                  Let us go down, I pray you.

_Voice (loudly_). _Say nay_!--_say nay_!

_Pol_. (_aside_). 'Tis strange!--'tis very strange--methought
                     the voice
                  Chimed in with my desires and bade me stay!
             (_Approaching the window_)
                  Sweet voice! I heed thee, and will surely stay.
                  Now be this fancy, by heaven, or be it Fate,
                  Still will I not descend. Baldazzar, make
                  Apology unto the Duke for me;
                  I go not down to-night.

_Bal_.            Your lordship's pleasure
                  Shall be attended to. Good-night, Politian.

_Pol_.            Good-night, my friend, good-night.




IV.

The Gardens of a Palace--Moonlight. LALAGE and POLITIAN.


_Lalage_.         And dost thou speak of love
                  To _me_, Politian?--dost thou speak of love
                  To Lalage?--ah woe--ah woe is me!
                  This mockery is most cruel--most cruel indeed!

_Politian_.       Weep not! oh, sob not thus!--thy bitter tears
                  Will madden me. Oh, mourn not, Lalage--
                  Be comforted! I know--I know it all,
                  And _still_ I speak of love. Look at me, brightest,
                  And beautiful Lalage!--turn here thine eyes!
                  Thou askest me if I could speak of love,
                  Knowing what I know, and seeing what I have seen
                  Thou askest me that--and thus I answer thee--
                  Thus on my bended knee I answer thee. (_kneeling_.)
                  Sweet Lalage, _I love thee_--_love thee_--_love thee_;
                  Thro' good and ill--thro' weal and woe, _I love thee_.
                  Not mother, with her first-born on her knee,
                  Thrills with intenser love than I for thee.
                  Not on God's altar, in any time or clime,
                  Burned there a holier fire than burneth now
                  Within my spirit for _thee_. And do I love?
               (_arising_.)
                  Even for thy woes I love thee--even for thy woes--
                  Thy beauty and thy woes.

_Lal_.            Alas, proud Earl,
                  Thou dost forget thyself, remembering me!
                  How, in thy father's halls, among the maidens
                  Pure and reproachless of thy princely line,
                  Could the dishonored Lalage abide?
                  Thy wife, and with a tainted memory--
                  My seared and blighted name, how would it tally
                  With the ancestral honors of thy house,
                  And with thy glory?

_Pol_.            Speak not to me of glory!
                  I hate--I loathe the name; I do abhor
                  The unsatisfactory and ideal thing.
                  Art thou not Lalage, and I Politian?
                  Do I not love--art thou not beautiful--
                  What need we more? Ha! glory! now speak not of it:
                  By all I hold most sacred and most solemn--
                  By all my wishes now--my fears hereafter--
                  By all I scorn on earth and hope in heaven--
                  There is no deed I would more glory in,
                  Than in thy cause to scoff at this same glory
                  And trample it under foot. What matters it--
                  What matters it, my fairest, and my best,
                  That we go down unhonored and forgotten
                  Into the dust--so we descend together?
                  Descend together--and then--and then perchance--

_Lal_.            Why dost thou pause, Politian?

_Pol_.            And then perchance
                  _Arise_ together, Lalage, and roam
                  The starry and quiet dwellings of the blest,
                  And still--

_Lal_.            Why dost thou pause, Politian?

_Pol_.            And still _together_--_together_.

_Lal_.            Now, Earl of Leicester!
                  Thou _lovest_ me, and in my heart of hearts
                  I feel thou lovest me truly.

_Pol_.            O Lalage!
               (_throwing himself upon his knee_.)
                  And lovest thou _me_?

_Lal_.            Hist! hush! within the gloom
                  Of yonder trees methought a figure passed--
                  A spectral figure, solemn, and slow, and noiseless--
                  Like the grim shadow Conscience, solemn and noiseless.
               (_walks across and returns_.)
                  I was mistaken--'twas but a giant bough
                  Stirred by the autumn wind. Politian!

_Pol_.            My Lalage--my love! why art thou moved?
                  Why dost thou turn so pale? Not Conscience self,
                  Far less a shadow which thou likenest to it,
                  Should shake the firm spirit thus. But the night wind
                  Is chilly--and these melancholy boughs
                  Throw over all things a gloom.

_Lal_.            Politian!
                  Thou speakest to me of love. Knowest thou the land
                  With which all tongues are busy--a land new found--
                  Miraculously found by one of Genoa--
                  A thousand leagues within the golden west?
                  A fairy land of flowers, and fruit, and sunshine,--
                  And crystal lakes, and over-arching forests,
                  And mountains, around whose towering summits the winds
                  Of Heaven untrammelled flow--which air to breathe
                  Is Happiness now, and will be Freedom hereafter
                  In days that are to come?

_Pol_.            Oh, wilt thou--wilt thou
                  Fly to that Paradise--my Lalage, wilt thou
                  Fly thither with me? There Care shall be forgotten,
                  And Sorrow shall be no more, and Eros be all.
                  And life shall then be mine, for I will live
                  For thee, and in thine eyes--and thou shalt be
                  No more a mourner--but the radiant Joys
                  Shall wait upon thee, and the angel Hope
                  Attend thee ever; and I will kneel to thee
                  And worship thee, and call thee my beloved,
                  My own, my beautiful, my love, my wife,
                  My all;--oh, wilt thou--wilt thou, Lalage,
                  Fly thither with me?

_Lal_.            A deed is to be done--
                  Castiglione lives!

_Pol_.            And he shall die!

                  (_Exit_.)

_Lal_.
(_after a pause_). And--he--shall--die!--alas!
                  Castiglione die? Who spoke the words?
                  Where am I?--what was it he said?--Politian!
                  Thou _art_ not gone--thou art not _gone_, Politian!
                  I _feel_ thou art not gone--yet dare not look,
                  Lest I behold thee not--thou _couldst_ not go
                  With those words upon thy lips--oh, speak to me!
                  And let me hear thy voice--one word--one word,
                  To say thou art not gone,--one little sentence,
                  To say how thou dost scorn--how thou dost hate
                  My womanly weakness. Ha! ha! thou _art_ not gone--
                  Oh, speak to me! I _knew_ thou wouldst not go!
                  I knew thou wouldst not, couldst not, _durst_ not go.
                  Villain, thou _art_ not gone--thou mockest me!
                  And thus I clutch thee--thus!--He is gone, he is gone--
                  Gone--gone. Where am I?--'tis well--'tis very well!
                  So that the blade be keen--the blow be sure,
                  'Tis well, 'tis _very_ well--alas! alas!




V.

The Suburbs. POLITIAN alone.


_Politian_.       This weakness grows upon me. I am fain
                  And much I fear me ill--it will not do
                  To die ere I have lived!--Stay--stay thy hand,
                  O Azrael, yet awhile!--Prince of the Powers
                  Of Darkness and the Tomb, oh, pity me!
                  Oh, pity me! let me not perish now,
                  In the budding of my Paradisal Hope!
                  Give me to live yet--yet a little while:
                  'Tis I who pray for life--I who so late
                  Demanded but to die!--What sayeth the Count?

              _Enter Baldazzar_.

_Baldazzar_.      That, knowing no cause of quarrel or of feud
                  Between the Earl Politian and himself,
                  He doth decline your cartel.

_Pol_.            _What_ didst thou say?
                  What answer was it you brought me, good Baldazzar?
                  With what excessive fragrance the zephyr comes
                  Laden from yonder bowers!--a fairer day,
                  Or one more worthy Italy, methinks
                  No mortal eyes have seen!--_what_ said the Count?

_Bal_.            That he, Castiglione, not being aware
                  Of any feud existing, or any cause
                  Of quarrel between your lordship and himself,
                  Cannot accept the challenge.

_Pol_.            It is most true--
                  All this is very true. When saw you, sir,
                  When saw you now, Baldazzar, in the frigid
                  Ungenial Britain which we left so lately,
                  A heaven so calm as this--so utterly free
                  From the evil taint of clouds?--and he did _say_?

_Bal_.            No more, my lord, than I have told you:
                  The Count Castiglione will not fight.
                  Having no cause for quarrel.

_Pol_.            Now this is true--
                  All very true. Thou art my friend, Baldazzar,
                  And I have not forgotten it--thou'lt do me
                  A piece of service: wilt thou go back and say
                  Unto this man, that I, the Earl of Leicester,
                  Hold him a villain?--thus much, I pr'ythee, say
                  Unto the Count--it is exceeding just
                  He should have cause for quarrel.

_Bal_.            My lord!--my friend!--

_Pol_. (_aside_). 'Tis he--he comes himself!
       (_aloud_.) Thou reasonest well.
                  I know what thou wouldst say--not send the message--
                  Well!--I will think of it--I will not send it.
                  Now pr'ythee, leave me--hither doth come a person
                  With whom affairs of a most private nature
                  I would adjust.

_Bal_.            I go--to-morrow we meet,
                  Do we not?--at the Vatican.

_Pol_.            At the Vatican.

                  (_Exit Bal_.)

                  _Enter Castiglione_.

_Cas_.            The Earl of Leicester here!

_Pol_.            I _am_ the Earl of Leicester, and thou seest,
                  Dost thou not, that I am here?

_Cas_.            My lord, some strange,
                  Some singular mistake--misunderstanding--
                  Hath without doubt arisen: thou hast been urged
                  Thereby, in heat of anger, to address
                  Some words most unaccountable, in writing,
                  To me, Castiglione; the bearer being
                  Baldazzar, Duke of Surrey. I am aware
                  Of nothing which might warrant thee in this thing,
                  Having given thee no offence. Ha!--am I right?
                  'Twas a mistake?--undoubtedly--we all
                  Do err at times.

_Pol_.            Draw, villain, and prate no more!

_Cas_.            Ha!--draw?--and villain? have at thee then at once,
                  Proud Earl!
               (_Draws._)

_Pol_.
(_drawing_.)      Thus to the expiatory tomb,
                  Untimely sepulchre, I do devote thee
                  In the name of Lalage!

_Cas_. (_letting fall his sword and recoiling to the extremity of the
         stage_.)
                  Of Lalage!
                  Hold off--thy sacred hand!--avaunt, I say!
                  Avaunt--I will not fight thee--indeed I dare not.

_Pol_.            Thou wilt not fight with me didst say, Sir Count?
                  Shall I be baffled thus?--now this is well;
                  Didst say thou _darest_ not? Ha!

_Cas_.            I dare not--dare not--
                  Hold off thy hand--with that beloved name
                  So fresh upon thy lips I will not fight thee--
                  I cannot--dare not.

_Pol_.            Now, by my halidom,
                  I do believe thee!--coward, I do believe thee!

_Cas_.            Ha!--coward!--this may not be!
(_clutches his sword and staggers towards Politian, but his purpose is
changed before reaching him, and he falls upon hia knee at the feet of
the Earl._)
                  Alas! my lord,
                  It is--it is--most true. In such a cause
                  I am the veriest coward. Oh, pity me!

_Pol.
(greatly softened_). Alas!--I do--indeed I pity thee.

_Cas_.            And Lalage--

_Pol_.            _Scoundrel!--arise and die!_

_Cas_.            It needeth not be--thus--thus--Oh, let me die
                  Thus on my bended knee. It were most fitting
                  That in this deep humiliation I perish.
                  For in the fight I will not raise a hand
                  Against thee, Earl of Leicester. Strike thou home--
               (_baring his bosom_.)
                  Here is no let or hindrance to thy weapon--
                  Strike home. I _will not_ fight thee.

_Pol_.            Now's Death and Hell!
                  Am I not--am I not sorely--grievously tempted
                  To take thee at thy word? But mark me, sir:
                  Think not to fly me thus. Do thou prepare
                  For public insult in the streets--before
                  The eyes of the citizens. I'll follow thee--
                  Like an avenging spirit I'll follow thee
                  Even unto death. Before those whom thou lovest--
                  Before all Rome I'll taunt thee, villain,--I'll taunt
                    thee,
                  Dost hear? with _cowardice_--thou _wilt not_ fight me?
                  Thou liest! thou _shalt_!

                  (_Exit_.)

_Cas_.            Now this indeed is just!
                  Most righteous, and most just, avenging Heaven!








       *       *       *       *       *







_Duke_.           Why do you laugh?

_Castiglione_.    Indeed.
                  I hardly know myself. Stay! Was it not
                  On yesterday we were speaking of the Earl?
                  Of the Earl Politian? Yes! it was yesterday.
                  Alessandra, you and I, you must remember!
                  We were walking in the garden.

_Duke_.           Perfectly.
                  I do remember it--what of it--what then?

_Cas_.            O nothing--nothing at all.

_Duke_.           Nothing at all!
                  It is most singular that you should laugh
                  At nothing at all!

_Cas_.            Most singular--singular!

_Duke_.           Look yon, Castiglione, be so kind
                  As tell me, sir, at once what 'tis you mean.
                  What are you talking of?

_Cas_.            Was it not so?
                  We differed in opinion touching him.

_Duke_.           Him!--Whom?

_Cas_.            Why, sir, the Earl Politian.

_Duke_.           The Earl of Leicester! Yes!--is it he you mean?
                  We differed, indeed. If I now recollect
                  The words you used were that the Earl you knew
                  Was neither learned nor mirthful.

_Cas_.            Ha! ha!--now did I?

_Duke_.           That did you, sir, and well I knew at the time
                  You were wrong, it being not the character
                  Of the Earl--whom all the world allows to be
                  A most hilarious man. Be not, my son,
                  Too positive again.

_Cas_.            'Tis singular!
                  Most singular! I could not think it possible
                  So little time could so much alter one!
                  To say the truth about an hour ago,
                  As I was walking with the Count San Ozzo,
                  All arm in arm, we met this very man
                  The Earl--he, with his friend Baldazzar,
                  Having just arrived in Rome. Ha! ha! he _is_ altered!
                  Such an account he gave me of his journey!
                  'Twould have made you die with laughter--such tales he
                    told
                  Of his caprices and his merry freaks
                  Along the road--such oddity--such humor--
                  Such wit--such whim--such flashes of wild merriment
                  Set off too in such full relief by the grave
                  Demeanor of his friend--who, to speak the truth
                  Was gravity itself--

_Duke_.           Did I not tell you?

_Cas_.            You did--and yet 'tis strange! but true, as strange,
                  How much I was mistaken! I always thought
                  The Earl a gloomy man.

_Duke_.           So, so, you see!
                  Be not too positive. Whom have we here?
                  It cannot be the Earl?

_Cas_.            The Earl! Oh no!
                  Tis not the Earl--but yet it is--and leaning
                  Upon his friend Baldazzar. Ah! welcome, sir!
                  (_Enter Politian and Baldazzar_.)
                  My lord, a second welcome let me give you
                  To Rome--his Grace the Duke of Broglio.
                  Father! this is the Earl Politian, Earl
                  Of Leicester in Great Britain.
                  [_Politian bows haughtily_.]
                  That, his friend
                  Baldazzar, Duke of Surrey. The Earl has letters,
                  So please you, for Your Grace.

_Duke_.           Ha! ha! Most welcome
                  To Rome and to our palace, Earl Politian!
                  And you, most noble Duke! I am glad to see you!
                  I knew your father well, my Lord Politian.
                  Castiglione! call your cousin hither,
                  And let me make the noble Earl acquainted
                  With your betrothed. You come, sir, at a time
                  Most seasonable. The wedding--

_Politian_.       Touching those letters, sir,
                  Your son made mention of--your son, is he not?--
                  Touching those letters, sir, I wot not of them.
                  If such there be, my friend Baldazzar here--
                  Baldazzar! ah!--my friend Baldazzar here
                  Will hand them to Your Grace. I would retire.

_Duke_.           Retire!--so soon?

_Cas_.            What ho! Benito! Rupert!
                  His lordship's chambers--show his lordship to them!
                  His lordship is unwell.

             (_Enter Benito_.)

_Ben_.            This way, my lord!

             (_Exit, followed by Politian_.)

_Duke_.           Retire! Unwell!

_Bal_.            So please you, sir. I fear me
                  'Tis as you say--his lordship is unwell.
                  The damp air of the evening--the fatigue
                  Of a long journey--the--indeed I had better
                  Follow his lordship. He must be unwell.
                  I will return anon.

_Duke_.           Return anon!
                  Now this is very strange! Castiglione!
                  This way, my son, I wish to speak with thee.
                  You surely were mistaken in what you said
                  Of the Earl, mirthful, indeed!--which of us said
                  Politian was a melancholy man?

                 (_Exeunt_.)





       *       *       *       *       *





                           POEMS OF YOUTH





       *       *       *       *       *







SONNET--TO SCIENCE.


  SCIENCE! true daughter of Old Time thou art!
    Who alterest all things with thy peering eyes.
  Why preyest thou thus upon the poet's heart,
    Vulture, whose wings are dull realities
  How should he love thee? or how deem thee wise,
    Who wouldst not leave him in his wandering
  To seek for treasure in the jewelled skies,
    Albeit he soared with an undaunted wing!
  Hast thou not dragged Diana from her car?
    And driven the Hamadryad from the wood
  To seek a shelter in some happier star?
    Hast thou not torn the Naiad from her flood,
  The Elfin from the green grass, and from me
  The summer dream beneath the tamarind tree?


1829.





       *       *       *       *       *









       *       *       *       *       *





AL AARAAF. [1]



PART I.


  O! nothing earthly save the ray
  (Thrown back from flowers) of Beauty's eye,
  As in those gardens where the day
  Springs from the gems of Circassy--
  O! nothing earthly save the thrill
  Of melody in woodland rill--
  Or (music of the passion-hearted)
  Joy's voice so peacefully departed
  That like the murmur in the shell,
  Its echo dwelleth and will dwell--
  O! nothing of the dross of ours--
  Yet all the beauty--all the flowers
  That list our Love, and deck our bowers--
  Adorn yon world afar, afar--
  The wandering star.

  'Twas a sweet time for Nesace--for there
  Her world lay lolling on the golden air,
  Near four bright suns--a temporary rest--
  An oasis in desert of the blest.
  Away away--'mid seas of rays that roll
  Empyrean splendor o'er th' unchained soul--
  The soul that scarce (the billows are so dense)
  Can struggle to its destin'd eminence--
  To distant spheres, from time to time, she rode,
  And late to ours, the favour'd one of God--
  But, now, the ruler of an anchor'd realm,
  She throws aside the sceptre--leaves the helm,
  And, amid incense and high spiritual hymns,
  Laves in quadruple light her angel limbs.

  Now happiest, loveliest in yon lovely Earth,
  Whence sprang the "Idea of Beauty" into birth,
  (Falling in wreaths thro' many a startled star,
  Like woman's hair 'mid pearls, until, afar,
  It lit on hills Achaian, and there dwelt),
  She look'd into Infinity--and knelt.
  Rich clouds, for canopies, about her curled--
  Fit emblems of the model of her world--
  Seen but in beauty--not impeding sight--
  Of other beauty glittering thro' the light--
  A wreath that twined each starry form around,
  And all the opal'd air in color bound.

  All hurriedly she knelt upon a bed
  Of flowers: of lilies such as rear'd the head
  On the fair Capo Deucato [2], and sprang
  So eagerly around about to hang
  Upon the flying footsteps of--deep pride--
  Of her who lov'd a mortal--and so died [3].
  The Sephalica, budding with young bees,
  Uprear'd its purple stem around her knees:
  And gemmy flower, of Trebizond misnam'd [4]--
  Inmate of highest stars, where erst it sham'd
  All other loveliness: its honied dew
  (The fabled nectar that the heathen knew)
  Deliriously sweet, was dropp'd from Heaven,
  And fell on gardens of the unforgiven
  In Trebizond--and on a sunny flower
  So like its own above that, to this hour,
  It still remaineth, torturing the bee
  With madness, and unwonted reverie:
  In Heaven, and all its environs, the leaf
  And blossom of the fairy plant, in grief
  Disconsolate linger--grief that hangs her head,
  Repenting follies that full long have fled,
  Heaving her white breast to the balmy air,
  Like guilty beauty, chasten'd, and more fair:
  Nyctanthes too, as sacred as the light
  She fears to perfume, perfuming the night:
  And Clytia [5] pondering between many a sun,
  While pettish tears adown her petals run:
  And that aspiring flower that sprang on Earth [6]--
  And died, ere scarce exalted into birth,
  Bursting its odorous heart in spirit to wing
  Its way to Heaven, from garden of a king:
  And Valisnerian lotus thither flown [7]
  From struggling with the waters of the Rhone:
  And thy most lovely purple perfume, Zante [8]!
  Isola d'oro!--Fior di Levante!
  And the Nelumbo bud that floats for ever [9]
  With Indian Cupid down the holy river--
  Fair flowers, and fairy! to whose care is given
  To bear the Goddess' song, in odors, up to Heaven [10]:

    "Spirit! that dwellest where,
      In the deep sky,
    The terrible and fair,
      In beauty vie!
    Beyond the line of blue--
      The boundary of the star
    Which turneth at the view
      Of thy barrier and thy bar--
    Of the barrier overgone
      By the comets who were cast
    From their pride, and from their throne
      To be drudges till the last--
    To be carriers of fire
      (The red fire of their heart)
    With speed that may not tire
      And with pain that shall not part--
    Who livest--_that_ we know--
      In Eternity--we feel--
    But the shadow of whose brow
      What spirit shall reveal?
    Tho' the beings whom thy Nesace,
      Thy messenger hath known
    Have dream'd for thy Infinity
      A model of their own [11]--
    Thy will is done, O God!
      The star hath ridden high
    Thro' many a tempest, but she rode
      Beneath thy burning eye;
    And here, in thought, to thee--
      In thought that can alone
    Ascend thy empire and so be
      A partner of thy throne--
    By winged Fantasy [12],
       My embassy is given,
    Till secrecy shall knowledge be
      In the environs of Heaven."

  She ceas'd--and buried then her burning cheek
  Abash'd, amid the lilies there, to seek
  A shelter from the fervor of His eye;
  For the stars trembled at the Deity.
  She stirr'd not--breath'd not--for a voice was there
  How solemnly pervading the calm air!
  A sound of silence on the startled ear
  Which dreamy poets name "the music of the sphere."
  Ours is a world of words: Quiet we call
  "Silence"--which is the merest word of all.

  All Nature speaks, and ev'n ideal things
  Flap shadowy sounds from the visionary wings--
  But ah! not so when, thus, in realms on high
  The eternal voice of God is passing by,
  And the red winds are withering in the sky!
  "What tho' in worlds which sightless cycles run [13],
  Link'd to a little system, and one sun--
  Where all my love is folly, and the crowd
  Still think my terrors but the thunder cloud,
  The storm, the earthquake, and the ocean-wrath
  (Ah! will they cross me in my angrier path?)
  What tho' in worlds which own a single sun
  The sands of time grow dimmer as they run,
  Yet thine is my resplendency, so given
  To bear my secrets thro' the upper Heaven.
  Leave tenantless thy crystal home, and fly,
  With all thy train, athwart the moony sky--
  Apart--like fire-flies in Sicilian night [14],
  And wing to other worlds another light!
  Divulge the secrets of thy embassy
  To the proud orbs that twinkle--and so be
  To ev'ry heart a barrier and a ban
  Lest the stars totter in the guilt of man!"

   Up rose the maiden in the yellow night,
  The single-mooned eve!-on earth we plight
  Our faith to one love--and one moon adore--
  The birth-place of young Beauty had no more.
  As sprang that yellow star from downy hours,
  Up rose the maiden from her shrine of flowers,
  And bent o'er sheeny mountain and dim plain
  Her way--but left not yet her Therasan reign [15].



PART II.


  High on a mountain of enamell'd head--
  Such as the drowsy shepherd on his bed
  Of giant pasturage lying at his ease,
  Raising his heavy eyelid, starts and sees
  With many a mutter'd "hope to be forgiven"
  What time the moon is quadrated in Heaven--
  Of rosy head, that towering far away
  Into the sunlit ether, caught the ray
  Of sunken suns at eve--at noon of night,
  While the moon danc'd with the fair stranger light--
  Uprear'd upon such height arose a pile
  Of gorgeous columns on th' uuburthen'd air,
  Flashing from Parian marble that twin smile
  Far down upon the wave that sparkled there,
  And nursled the young mountain in its lair.
  Of molten stars their pavement, such as fall [16]
  Thro' the ebon air, besilvering the pall
  Of their own dissolution, while they die--
  Adorning then the dwellings of the sky.
  A dome, by linked light from Heaven let down,
  Sat gently on these columns as a crown--
  A window of one circular diamond, there,
  Look'd out above into the purple air
  And rays from God shot down that meteor chain
  And hallow'd all the beauty twice again,
  Save when, between th' Empyrean and that ring,
  Some eager spirit flapp'd his dusky wing.
  But on the pillars Seraph eyes have seen
  The dimness of this world: that grayish green
  That Nature loves the best for Beauty's grave
  Lurk'd in each cornice, round each architrave--
  And every sculptured cherub thereabout
  That from his marble dwelling peered out,
  Seem'd earthly in the shadow of his niche--
  Achaian statues in a world so rich?
  Friezes from Tadmor and Persepolis [17]--
  From Balbec, and the stilly, clear abyss
  Of beautiful Gomorrah! Oh, the wave [18]
  Is now upon thee--but too late to save!
  Sound loves to revel in a summer night:
  Witness the murmur of the gray twilight
  That stole upon the ear, in Eyraco [19],
  Of many a wild star-gazer long ago--
  That stealeth ever on the ear of him
  Who, musing, gazeth on the distance dim,
  And sees the darkness coming as a cloud--
  Is not its form--its voice--most palpable and loud?  [20]
   But what is this?--it cometh--and it brings
  A music with it--'tis the rush of wings--
  A pause--and then a sweeping, falling strain,
  And Nesace is in her halls again.
  From the wild energy of wanton haste
  Her cheeks were flushing, and her lips apart;
  The zone that clung around her gentle waist
  Had burst beneath the heaving of her heart.
  Within the centre of that hall to breathe
  She paus'd and panted, Zanthe! all beneath,
  The fairy light that kiss'd her golden hair
  And long'd to rest, yet could but sparkle there!

  Young flowers were whispering in melody [21]
  To happy flowers that night--and tree to tree;
  Fountains were gushing music as they fell
  In many a star-lit grove, or moon-light dell;
  Yet silence came upon material things--
  Fair flowers, bright waterfalls and angel wings--
  And sound alone that from the spirit sprang
  Bore burthen to the charm the maiden sang:

    "Neath blue-bell or streamer--
      Or tufted wild spray
    That keeps, from the dreamer,
      The moonbeam away--[22]
    Bright beings! that ponder,
      With half-closing eyes,
    On the stars which your wonder
      Hath drawn from the skies,
    Till they glance thro' the shade, and
      Come down to your brow
    Like--eyes of the maiden
      Who calls on you now--
    Arise! from your dreaming
      In violet bowers,
    To duty beseeming
      These star-litten hours--
    And shake from your tresses
      Encumber'd with dew

    The breath of those kisses
      That cumber them too--
    (O! how, without you, Love!
      Could angels be blest?)
    Those kisses of true love
      That lull'd ye to rest!
    Up! shake from your wing
      Each hindering thing:
    The dew of the night--
      It would weigh down your flight;
    And true love caresses--
      O! leave them apart!
    They are light on the tresses,
      But lead on the heart.

    Ligeia! Ligeia!
      My beautiful one!
    Whose harshest idea
      Will to melody run,
    O! is it thy will
      On the breezes to toss?
    Or, capriciously still,
      Like the lone Albatross, [23]
    Incumbent on night
      (As she on the air)
    To keep watch with delight
      On the harmony there?

    Ligeia! wherever
      Thy image may be,
    No magic shall sever
      Thy music from thee.
    Thou hast bound many eyes
      In a dreamy sleep--
    But the strains still arise
      Which _thy_ vigilance keep--

    The sound of the rain
      Which leaps down to the flower,
    And dances again
      In the rhythm of the shower--
    The murmur that springs [24]
      From the growing of grass
    Are the music of things--
      But are modell'd, alas!
    Away, then, my dearest,
      O! hie thee away
    To springs that lie clearest
      Beneath the moon-ray--
    To lone lake that smiles,
      In its dream of deep rest,
    At the many star-isles
    That enjewel its breast--
    Where wild flowers, creeping,
      Have mingled their shade,
    On its margin is sleeping
      Full many a maid--
    Some have left the cool glade, and
      Have slept with the bee--[25]
    Arouse them, my maiden,
      On moorland and lea--

    Go! breathe on their slumber,
      All softly in ear,
    The musical number
      They slumber'd to hear--
    For what can awaken
      An angel so soon
    Whose sleep hath been taken
      Beneath the cold moon,
    As the spell which no slumber
      Of witchery may test,
    The rhythmical number
      Which lull'd him to rest?"

  Spirits in wing, and angels to the view,
  A thousand seraphs burst th' Empyrean thro',
  Young dreams still hovering on their drowsy flight--
  Seraphs in all but "Knowledge," the keen light
  That fell, refracted, thro' thy bounds afar,
  O death! from eye of God upon that star;
  Sweet was that error--sweeter still that death--
  Sweet was that error--ev'n with _us_ the breath
  Of Science dims the mirror of our joy--
  To them 'twere the Simoom, and would destroy--
  For what (to them) availeth it to know
  That Truth is Falsehood--or that Bliss is Woe?
  Sweet was their death--with them to die was rife
  With the last ecstasy of satiate life--
  Beyond that death no immortality--
  But sleep that pondereth and is not "to be"--
  And there--oh! may my weary spirit dwell--
  Apart from Heaven's Eternity--and yet how far from Hell! [26]

  What guilty spirit, in what shrubbery dim
  Heard not the stirring summons of that hymn?
  But two: they fell: for heaven no grace imparts
  To those who hear not for their beating hearts.
  A maiden-angel and her seraph-lover--
  O! where (and ye may seek the wide skies over)
  Was Love, the blind, near sober Duty known?
  Unguided Love hath fallen--'mid "tears of perfect moan." [27]

  He was a goodly spirit--he who fell:
  A wanderer by mossy-mantled well--
  A gazer on the lights that shine above--
  A dreamer in the moonbeam by his love:
  What wonder? for each star is eye-like there,
  And looks so sweetly down on Beauty's hair--
  And they, and ev'ry mossy spring were holy
  To his love-haunted heart and melancholy.
  The night had found (to him a night of wo)
  Upon a mountain crag, young Angelo--
  Beetling it bends athwart the solemn sky,
  And scowls on starry worlds that down beneath it lie.
  Here sate he with his love--his dark eye bent
  With eagle gaze along the firmament:
  Now turn'd it upon her--but ever then
  It trembled to the orb of EARTH again.

  "Ianthe, dearest, see! how dim that ray!
  How lovely 'tis to look so far away!
  She seemed not thus upon that autumn eve
  I left her gorgeous halls--nor mourned to leave,
  That eve--that eve--I should remember well--
  The sun-ray dropped, in Lemnos with a spell
  On th' Arabesque carving of a gilded hall
  Wherein I sate, and on the draperied wall--
  And on my eyelids--O, the heavy light!
  How drowsily it weighed them into night!
  On flowers, before, and mist, and love they ran
  With Persian Saadi in his Gulistan:
  But O, that light!--I slumbered--Death, the while,
  Stole o'er my senses in that lovely isle
  So softly that no single silken hair
  Awoke that slept--or knew that he was there.

  "The last spot of Earth's orb I trod upon
  Was a proud temple called the Parthenon; [28]
  More beauty clung around her columned wall
  Then even thy glowing bosom beats withal, [29]
  And when old Time my wing did disenthral
  Thence sprang I--as the eagle from his tower,
  And years I left behind me in an hour.
  What time upon her airy bounds I hung,
  One half the garden of her globe was flung
  Unrolling as a chart unto my view--
  Tenantless cities of the desert too!
  Ianthe, beauty crowded on me then,
  And half I wished to be again of men."

  "My Angelo! and why of them to be?
  A brighter dwelling-place is here for thee--
  And greener fields than in yon world above,
  And woman's loveliness--and passionate love."
  "But list, Ianthe! when the air so soft
  Failed, as my pennoned spirit leapt aloft, [30]
  Perhaps my brain grew dizzy--but the world
  I left so late was into chaos hurled,
  Sprang from her station, on the winds apart,
  And rolled a flame, the fiery Heaven athwart.
  Methought, my sweet one, then I ceased to soar,
  And fell--not swiftly as I rose before,
  But with a downward, tremulous motion thro'
  Light, brazen rays, this golden star unto!
  Nor long the measure of my falling hours,
  For nearest of all stars was thine to ours--
  Dread star! that came, amid a night of mirth,
  A red Daedalion on the timid Earth."

  "We came--and to thy Earth--but not to us
  Be given our lady's bidding to discuss:
  We came, my love; around, above, below,
  Gay fire-fly of the night we come and go,
  Nor ask a reason save the angel-nod
  _She_ grants to us as granted by her God--
  But, Angelo, than thine gray Time unfurled
  Never his fairy wing o'er fairer world!
  Dim was its little disk, and angel eyes
  Alone could see the phantom in the skies,
  When first Al Aaraaf knew her course to be
  Headlong thitherward o'er the starry sea--
  But when its glory swelled upon the sky,
  As glowing Beauty's bust beneath man's eye,
  We paused before the heritage of men,
  And thy star trembled--as doth Beauty then!"

  Thus in discourse, the lovers whiled away
  The night that waned and waned and brought no day.
  They fell: for Heaven to them no hope imparts
  Who hear not for the beating of their hearts.


1839.








TAMERLANE.


  Kind solace in a dying hour!
  Such, father, is not (now) my theme--
  I will not madly deem that power
  Of Earth may shrive me of the sin
  Unearthly pride hath revelled in--
  I have no time to dote or dream:
  You call it hope--that fire of fire!
  It is but agony of desire:
  If I _can_ hope--O God! I can--
  Its fount is holier--more divine--
  I would not call thee fool, old man,
  But such is not a gift of thine.

  Know thou the secret of a spirit
  Bowed from its wild pride into shame
  O yearning heart! I did inherit
  Thy withering portion with the fame,
  The searing glory which hath shone
  Amid the Jewels of my throne,
  Halo of Hell! and with a pain
  Not Hell shall make me fear again--
  O craving heart, for the lost flowers
  And sunshine of my summer hours!
  The undying voice of that dead time,
  With its interminable chime,
  Rings, in the spirit of a spell,
  Upon thy emptiness--a knell.

  I have not always been as now:
  The fevered diadem on my brow
  I claimed and won usurpingly--
  Hath not the same fierce heirdom given
  Rome to the Csar--this to me?
  The heritage of a kingly mind,
  And a proud spirit which hath striven
  Triumphantly with human kind.
  On mountain soil I first drew life:
  The mists of the Taglay have shed
  Nightly their dews upon my head,
  And, I believe, the winged strife
  And tumult of the headlong air
  Have nestled in my very hair.

  So late from Heaven--that dew--it fell
  ('Mid dreams of an unholy night)
  Upon me with the touch of Hell,
  While the red flashing of the light
  From clouds that hung, like banners, o'er,
  Appeared to my half-closing eye
  The pageantry of monarchy;
  And the deep trumpet-thunder's roar
  Came hurriedly upon me, telling
  Of human battle, where my voice,
  My own voice, silly child!--was swelling
  (O! how my spirit would rejoice,
  And leap within me at the cry)
  The battle-cry of Victory!

  The rain came down upon my head
  Unsheltered--and the heavy wind
  Rendered me mad and deaf and blind.
  It was but man, I thought, who shed
  Laurels upon me: and the rush--
  The torrent of the chilly air
  Gurgled within my ear the crush
  Of empires--with the captive's prayer--
  The hum of suitors--and the tone
  Of flattery 'round a sovereign's throne.

  My passions, from that hapless hour,
  Usurped a tyranny which men
  Have deemed since I have reached to power,
  My innate nature--be it so:
  But, father, there lived one who, then,
  Then--in my boyhood--when their fire
  Burned with a still intenser glow
  (For passion must, with youth, expire)
  E'en _then_ who knew this iron heart
  In woman's weakness had a part.

  I have no words--alas!--to tell
  The loveliness of loving well!
  Nor would I now attempt to trace
  The more than beauty of a face
  Whose lineaments, upon my mind,
  Are--shadows on th' unstable wind:
  Thus I remember having dwelt
  Some page of early lore upon,
  With loitering eye, till I have felt
  The letters--with their meaning--melt
  To fantasies--with none.

  O, she was worthy of all love!
  Love as in infancy was mine--
  'Twas such as angel minds above
  Might envy; her young heart the shrine
  On which my every hope and thought
  Were incense--then a goodly gift,
  For they were childish and upright--
  Pure--as her young example taught:
  Why did I leave it, and, adrift,
  Trust to the fire within, for light?

  We grew in age--and love--together--
  Roaming the forest, and the wild;
  My breast her shield in wintry weather--
  And, when the friendly sunshine smiled.
  And she would mark the opening skies,
  _I_ saw no Heaven--but in her eyes.
  Young Love's first lesson is----the heart:
  For 'mid that sunshine, and those smiles,
  When, from our little cares apart,
  And laughing at her girlish wiles,
  I'd throw me on her throbbing breast,
  And pour my spirit out in tears--
  There was no need to speak the rest--
  No need to quiet any fears
  Of her--who asked no reason why,
  But turned on me her quiet eye!

  Yet _more_ than worthy of the love
  My spirit struggled with, and strove
  When, on the mountain peak, alone,
  Ambition lent it a new tone--
  I had no being--but in thee:
  The world, and all it did contain
  In the earth--the air--the sea--
  Its joy--its little lot of pain
  That was new pleasure--the ideal,
  Dim, vanities of dreams by night--
  And dimmer nothings which were real--
  (Shadows--and a more shadowy light!)
  Parted upon their misty wings,
  And, so, confusedly, became
  Thine image and--a name--a name!
  Two separate--yet most intimate things.

  I was ambitious--have you known
  The passion, father? You have not:
  A cottager, I marked a throne
  Of half the world as all my own,
  And murmured at such lowly lot--
  But, just like any other dream,
  Upon the vapor of the dew
  My own had past, did not the beam
  Of beauty which did while it thro'
  The minute--the hour--the day--oppress
  My mind with double loveliness.

  We walked together on the crown
  Of a high mountain which looked down
  Afar from its proud natural towers
  Of rock and forest, on the hills--
  The dwindled hills! begirt with bowers
  And shouting with a thousand rills.

  I spoke to her of power and pride,
  But mystically--in such guise
  That she might deem it nought beside
  The moment's converse; in her eyes
  I read, perhaps too carelessly--
  A mingled feeling with my own--
  The flush on her bright cheek, to me
  Seemed to become a queenly throne
  Too well that I should let it be
  Light in the wilderness alone.

  I wrapped myself in grandeur then,
  And donned a visionary crown--
  Yet it was not that Fantasy
  Had thrown her mantle over me--
  But that, among the rabble--men,
  Lion ambition is chained down--
  And crouches to a keeper's hand--
  Not so in deserts where the grand--
  The wild--the terrible conspire
  With their own breath to fan his fire.

  Look 'round thee now on Samarcand!--
  Is she not queen of Earth? her pride
  Above all cities? in her hand
  Their destinies? in all beside
  Of glory which the world hath known
  Stands she not nobly and alone?
  Falling--her veriest stepping-stone
  Shall form the pedestal of a throne--
  And who her sovereign? Timour--he
  Whom the astonished people saw
  Striding o'er empires haughtily
  A diademed outlaw!

  O, human love! thou spirit given,
  On Earth, of all we hope in Heaven!
  Which fall'st into the soul like rain
  Upon the Siroc-withered plain,
  And, failing in thy power to bless,
  But leav'st the heart a wilderness!
  Idea! which bindest life around
  With music of so strange a sound
  And beauty of so wild a birth--
  Farewell! for I have won the Earth.

  When Hope, the eagle that towered, could see
  No cliff beyond him in the sky,
  His pinions were bent droopingly--
  And homeward turned his softened eye.
  'Twas sunset: When the sun will part
  There comes a sullenness of heart
  To him who still would look upon
  The glory of the summer sun.
  That soul will hate the ev'ning mist
  So often lovely, and will list
  To the sound of the coming darkness (known
  To those whose spirits hearken) as one
  Who, in a dream of night, _would_ fly,
  But _cannot_, from a danger nigh.

  What tho' the moon--tho' the white moon
  Shed all the splendor of her noon,
  _Her_ smile is chilly--and _her_ beam,
  In that time of dreariness, will seem
  (So like you gather in your breath)
  A portrait taken after death.
  And boyhood is a summer sun
  Whose waning is the dreariest one--
  For all we live to know is known,
  And all we seek to keep hath flown--
  Let life, then, as the day-flower, fall
  With the noon-day beauty--which is all.
  I reached my home--my home no more--
  For all had flown who made it so.
  I passed from out its mossy door,
  And, tho' my tread was soft and low,
  A voice came from the threshold stone
  Of one whom I had earlier known--
  O, I defy thee, Hell, to show
  On beds of fire that burn below,
  An humbler heart--a deeper woe.

  Father, I firmly do believe--
  I _know_--for Death who comes for me
  From regions of the blest afar,
  Where there is nothing to deceive,
  Hath left his iron gate ajar.
  And rays of truth you cannot see
  Are flashing thro' Eternity----
  I do believe that Eblis hath
  A snare in every human path--
  Else how, when in the holy grove
  I wandered of the idol, Love,--
  Who daily scents his snowy wings
  With incense of burnt-offerings
  From the most unpolluted things,
  Whose pleasant bowers are yet so riven
  Above with trellised rays from Heaven
  No mote may shun--no tiniest fly--
  The light'ning of his eagle eye--
  How was it that Ambition crept,
  Unseen, amid the revels there,
  Till growing bold, he laughed and leapt
  In the tangles of Love's very hair!



1829.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO HELEN.


  Helen, thy beauty is to me
    Like those Nicean barks of yore,
  That gently, o'er a perfumed sea,
    The weary, wayworn wanderer bore
    To his own native shore.

  On desperate seas long wont to roam,
    Thy hyacinth hair, thy classic face,
  Thy Naiad airs have brought me home
    To the glory that was Greece,
  To the grandeur that was Rome.

  Lo! in yon brilliant window niche,
    How statue-like I see thee stand,
    The agate lamp within thy hand!
  Ah, Psyche, from the regions which
    Are Holy Land!

1831.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE VALLEY OF UNREST.


  _Once_ it smiled a silent dell
  Where the people did not dwell;
  They had gone unto the wars,
  Trusting to the mild-eyed stars,
  Nightly, from their azure towers,
  To keep watch above the flowers,
  In the midst of which all day
  The red sun-light lazily lay,
  _Now_ each visitor shall confess
  The sad valley's restlessness.
  Nothing there is motionless--
  Nothing save the airs that brood
  Over the magic solitude.
  Ah, by no wind are stirred those trees
  That palpitate like the chill seas
  Around the misty Hebrides!
  Ah, by no wind those clouds are driven
  That rustle through the unquiet Heaven
  Unceasingly, from morn till even,
  Over the violets there that lie
  In myriad types of the human eye--
  Over the lilies that wave
  And weep above a nameless grave!
  They wave:--from out their fragrant tops
  Eternal dews come down in drops.
  They weep:--from off their delicate stems
  Perennial tears descend in gems.


1831.





       *       *       *       *       *





ISRAFEL. [1]


  In Heaven a spirit doth dwell
    "Whose heart-strings are a lute;"
  None sing so wildly well
  As the angel Israfel,
  And the giddy Stars (so legends tell),
  Ceasing their hymns, attend the spell
    Of his voice, all mute.

  Tottering above
    In her highest noon,
    The enamoured Moon
  Blushes with love,
    While, to listen, the red levin
    (With the rapid Pleiads, even,
    Which were seven),
    Pauses in Heaven.

  And they say (the starry choir
    And the other listening things)
  That Israfeli's fire
  Is owing to that lyre
    By which he sits and sings--
  The trembling living wire
  Of those unusual strings.

  But the skies that angel trod,
    Where deep thoughts are a duty--
  Where Love's a grow-up God--
    Where the Houri glances are
  Imbued with all the beauty
    Which we worship in a star.

  Therefore, thou art not wrong,
    Israfeli, who despisest
  An unimpassioned song;
  To thee the laurels belong,
    Best bard, because the wisest!
  Merrily live and long!

  The ecstasies above
    With thy burning measures suit--
  Thy grief, thy joy, thy hate, thy love,
    With the fervor of thy lute--
    Well may the stars be mute!

  Yes, Heaven is thine; but this
    Is a world of sweets and sours;
    Our flowers are merely--flowers,
  And the shadow of thy perfect bliss
    Is the sunshine of ours.

  If I could dwell
  Where Israfel
    Hath dwelt, and he where I,
  He might not sing so wildly well
    A mortal melody,
  While a bolder note than this might swell
    From my lyre within the sky.


1836.








       *       *       *       *       *





TO----


  I heed not that my earthly lot
    Hath--little of Earth in it--
  That years of love have been forgot
    In the hatred of a minute:--
  I mourn not that the desolate
    Are happier, sweet, than I,
  But that _you_ sorrow for _my_ fate
    Who am a passer-by.


1829.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO----


  The bowers whereat, in dreams, I see
    The wantonest singing birds,

  Are lips--and all thy melody
    Of lip-begotten words--

  Thine eyes, in Heaven of heart enshrined
    Then desolately fall,
  O God! on my funereal mind
    Like starlight on a pall--

  Thy heart--_thy_ heart!--I wake and sigh,
    And sleep to dream till day
  Of the truth that gold can never buy--
    Of the baubles that it may.


1829.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO THE RIVER


  Fair river! in thy bright, clear flow
    Of crystal, wandering water,
  Thou art an emblem of the glow
        Of beauty--the unhidden heart--
        The playful maziness of art
    In old Alberto's daughter;

  But when within thy wave she looks--
    Which glistens then, and trembles--
  Why, then, the prettiest of brooks
    Her worshipper resembles;
  For in his heart, as in thy stream,
    Her image deeply lies--
  His heart which trembles at the beam
    Of her soul-searching eyes.


1829.





       *       *       *       *       *





SONG.


  I saw thee on thy bridal day--
    When a burning blush came o'er thee,
  Though happiness around thee lay,
    The world all love before thee:

  And in thine eye a kindling light
    (Whatever it might be)
  Was all on Earth my aching sight
    Of Loveliness could see.

  That blush, perhaps, was maiden shame--
    As such it well may pass--
  Though its glow hath raised a fiercer flame
    In the breast of him, alas!

  Who saw thee on that bridal day,
    When that deep blush _would_ come o'er thee,
  Though happiness around thee lay,
    The world all love before thee.


1827.





       *       *       *       *       *





SPIRITS OF THE DEAD.


  Thy soul shall find itself alone
  'Mid dark thoughts of the gray tombstone
  Not one, of all the crowd, to pry
  Into thine hour of secrecy.
  Be silent in that solitude
    Which is not loneliness--for then
  The spirits of the dead who stood
    In life before thee are again
  In death around thee--and their will
  Shall overshadow thee: be still.
  The night--tho' clear--shall frown--
  And the stars shall not look down
  From their high thrones in the Heaven,
  With light like Hope to mortals given--
  But their red orbs, without beam,
  To thy weariness shall seem
  As a burning and a fever
  Which would cling to thee forever.
  Now are thoughts thou shalt not banish--
  Now are visions ne'er to vanish--
  From thy spirit shall they pass
  No more--like dew-drops from the grass.
  The breeze--the breath of God--is still--
  And the mist upon the hill
  Shadowy--shadowy--yet unbroken,
    Is a symbol and a token--
    How it hangs upon the trees,
    A mystery of mysteries!


1837.





       *       *       *       *       *





A DREAM.


  In visions of the dark night
    I have dreamed of joy departed--
  But a waking dream of life and light
    Hath left me broken-hearted.

  Ah! what is not a dream by day
    To him whose eyes are cast
  On things around him with a ray
    Turned back upon the past?

  That holy dream--that holy dream,
    While all the world were chiding,
  Hath cheered me as a lovely beam,
    A lonely spirit guiding.

  What though that light, thro' storm and night,
    So trembled from afar--
  What could there be more purely bright
    In Truth's day star?


1837.





       *       *       *       *       *





ROMANCE.


  Romance, who loves to nod and sing,
  With drowsy head and folded wing,
  Among the green leaves as they shake
  Far down within some shadowy lake,
  To me a painted paroquet
  Hath been--a most familiar bird--
  Taught me my alphabet to say--
  To lisp my very earliest word
  While in the wild wood I did lie,
  A child--with a most knowing eye.

  Of late, eternal Condor years
  So shake the very Heaven on high
  With tumult as they thunder by,
  I have no time for idle cares
  Though gazing on the unquiet sky.
  And when an hour with calmer wings
  Its down upon my spirit flings--
  That little time with lyre and rhyme
  To while away--forbidden things!
  My heart would feel to be a crime
  Unless it trembled with the strings.


1829.





       *       *       *       *       *





FAIRYLAND.


  Dim vales--and shadowy floods--
  And cloudy-looking woods,
  Whose forms we can't discover
  For the tears that drip all over
  Huge moons there wax and wane--
  Again--again--again--
  Every moment of the night--
  Forever changing places--
  And they put out the star-light
  With the breath from their pale faces.
  About twelve by the moon-dial
  One more filmy than the rest
  (A kind which, upon trial,
  They have found to be the best)
  Comes down--still down--and down
  With its centre on the crown
  Of a mountain's eminence,
  While its wide circumference
  In easy drapery falls
  Over hamlets, over halls,
  Wherever they may be--
  O'er the strange woods--o'er the sea--
  Over spirits on the wing--
  Over every drowsy thing--
  And buries them up quite
  In a labyrinth of light--
  And then, how deep!--O, deep!
  Is the passion of their sleep.
  In the morning they arise,
  And their moony covering
  Is soaring in the skies,
  With the tempests as they toss,
  Like--almost any thing--
  Or a yellow Albatross.
  They use that moon no more
  For the same end as before--
  Videlicet a tent--
  Which I think extravagant:
  Its atomies, however,
  Into a shower dissever,
  Of which those butterflies,
  Of Earth, who seek the skies,
  And so come down again
  (Never-contented thing!)
  Have brought a specimen
  Upon their quivering wings.


1831





       *       *       *       *       *





THE LAKE.


  In spring of youth it was my lot
  To haunt of the wide world a spot
  The which I could not love the less--
  So lovely was the loneliness
  Of a wild lake, with black rock bound,
  And the tall pines that towered around.

  But when the Night had thrown her pall
  Upon the spot, as upon all,
  And the mystic wind went by
  Murmuring in melody--
  Then--ah, then, I would awake
  To the terror of the lone lake.

  Yet that terror was not fright,
  But a tremulous delight--
  A feeling not the jewelled mine
  Could teach or bribe me to define--
  Nor Love--although the Love were thine.

  Death was in that poisonous wave,
  And in its gulf a fitting grave
  For him who thence could solace bring
  To his lone imagining--
  Whose solitary soul could make
  An Eden of that dim lake.


1827.





       *       *       *       *       *





EVENING STAR.


  'Twas noontide of summer,
    And midtime of night,
  And stars, in their orbits,
    Shone pale, through the light
  Of the brighter, cold moon.
    'Mid planets her slaves,
  Herself in the Heavens,
    Her beam on the waves.

    I gazed awhile
    On her cold smile;
  Too cold--too cold for me--
    There passed, as a shroud,
    A fleecy cloud,
  And I turned away to thee,
    Proud Evening Star,
    In thy glory afar
  And dearer thy beam shall be;
    For joy to my heart
    Is the proud part
  Thou bearest in Heaven at night,
    And more I admire
    Thy distant fire,
  Than that colder, lowly light.


1827.





       *       *       *       *       *





IMITATION.


  A dark unfathomed tide
  Of interminable pride--
  A mystery, and a dream,
  Should my early life seem;
  I say that dream was fraught
  With a wild and waking thought
  Of beings that have been,
  Which my spirit hath not seen,
  Had I let them pass me by,
  With a dreaming eye!
  Let none of earth inherit
  That vision on my spirit;
  Those thoughts I would control,
  As a spell upon his soul:
  For that bright hope at last
  And that light time have past,
  And my wordly rest hath gone
  With a sigh as it passed on:
  I care not though it perish
  With a thought I then did cherish.


1827.





       *       *       *       *       *





"THE HAPPIEST DAY."


     I.       The happiest day--the happiest hour
                My seared and blighted heart hath known,
              The highest hope of pride and power,
                I feel hath flown.


     II.      Of power! said I? Yes! such I ween
                But they have vanished long, alas!
              The visions of my youth have been--
                But let them pass.


     III.     And pride, what have I now with thee?
                Another brow may ev'n inherit
              The venom thou hast poured on me--
                Be still my spirit!


     IV.      The happiest day--the happiest hour
                Mine eyes shall see--have ever seen
              The brightest glance of pride and power
                I feel have been:


     V.       But were that hope of pride and power
                Now offered with the pain
              Ev'n _then_ I felt--that brightest hour
                I would not live again:

     VI.      For on its wing was dark alloy
                And as it fluttered--fell
              An essence--powerful to destroy
                A soul that knew it well.


1827.





       *       *       *       *       *





Translation from the Greek.


HYMN TO ARISTOGEITON AND HARMODIUS.


  I.      Wreathed in myrtle, my sword I'll conceal,
            Like those champions devoted and brave,
          When they plunged in the tyrant their steel,
            And to Athens deliverance gave.

  II.     Beloved heroes! your deathless souls roam
            In the joy breathing isles of the blest;
          Where the mighty of old have their home--
            Where Achilles and Diomed rest.

  III.    In fresh myrtle my blade I'll entwine,
            Like Harmodius, the gallant and good,
          When he made at the tutelar shrine
            A libation of Tyranny's blood.

  IV.     Ye deliverers of Athens from shame!
            Ye avengers of Liberty's wrongs!
          Endless ages shall cherish your fame,
            Embalmed in their echoing songs!

1827





       *       *       *       *       *





DREAMS.


  Oh! that my young life were a lasting dream!
  My spirit not awakening, till the beam
  Of an Eternity should bring the morrow.
  Yes! though that long dream were of hopeless sorrow,
  'Twere better than the cold reality
  Of waking life, to him whose heart must be,
  And hath been still, upon the lovely earth,
  A chaos of deep passion, from his birth.
  But should it be--that dream eternally
  Continuing--as dreams have been to me
  In my young boyhood--should it thus be given,
  'Twere folly still to hope for higher Heaven.
  For I have revelled when the sun was bright
  I' the summer sky, in dreams of living light
  And loveliness,--have left my very heart
  Inclines of my imaginary apart [1]
  From mine own home, with beings that have been
  Of mine own thought--what more could I have seen?
  'Twas once--and only once--and the wild hour
  From my remembrance shall not pass--some power
  Or spell had bound me--'twas the chilly wind
  Came o'er me in the night, and left behind
  Its image on my spirit--or the moon
  Shone on my slumbers in her lofty noon
  Too coldly--or the stars--howe'er it was
  That dream was that that night-wind--let it pass.
  _I have been_ happy, though in a dream.
  I have been happy--and I love the theme:
  Dreams! in their vivid coloring of life
  As in that fleeting, shadowy, misty strife
  Of semblance with reality which brings
  To the delirious eye, more lovely things
  Of Paradise and Love--and all my own!--
  Than young Hope in his sunniest hour hath known.








       *       *       *       *       *





"IN YOUTH I HAVE KNOWN ONE."


          _How often we forget all time, when lone
          Admiring Nature's universal throne;
          Her woods--her wilds--her mountains--the intense
          Reply of Hers to Our intelligence!_


I.        In youth I have known one with whom the Earth
            In secret communing held--as he with it,
          In daylight, and in beauty, from his birth:
            Whose fervid, flickering torch of life was lit
          From the sun and stars, whence he had drawn forth
            A passionate light such for his spirit was fit--
          And yet that spirit knew--not in the hour
            Of its own fervor--what had o'er it power.


II.       Perhaps it may be that my mind is wrought
            To a ferver [1] by the moonbeam that hangs o'er,
          But I will half believe that wild light fraught
            With more of sovereignty than ancient lore
          Hath ever told--or is it of a thought
            The unembodied essence, and no more
          That with a quickening spell doth o'er us pass
            As dew of the night-time, o'er the summer grass?


III.      Doth o'er us pass, when, as th' expanding eye
            To the loved object--so the tear to the lid
          Will start, which lately slept in apathy?
            And yet it need not be--(that object) hid
          From us in life--but common--which doth lie
            Each hour before us--but then only bid
          With a strange sound, as of a harp-string broken
            T' awake us--'Tis a symbol and a token--


IV.       Of what in other worlds shall be--and given
            In beauty by our God, to those alone
          Who otherwise would fall from life and Heaven
            Drawn by their heart's passion, and that tone,
          That high tone of the spirit which hath striven
            Though not with Faith--with godliness--whose throne
          With desperate energy 't hath beaten down;
            Wearing its own deep feeling as a crown.








       *       *       *       *       *





A PAN.



I.        How shall the burial rite be read?
            The solemn song be sung?
          The requiem for the loveliest dead,
            That ever died so young?


II.       Her friends are gazing on her,
            And on her gaudy bier,
          And weep!--oh! to dishonor
            Dead beauty with a tear!


III.     They loved her for her wealth--
           And they hated her for her pride--
          But she grew in feeble health,
            And they _love_ her--that she died.


IV.      They tell me (while they speak
           Of her "costly broider'd pall")
         That my voice is growing weak--
           That I should not sing at all--


V.       Or that my tone should be
           Tun'd to such solemn song
         So mournfully--so mournfully,
           That the dead may feel no wrong.


VI.      But she is gone above,
           With young Hope at her side,
         And I am drunk with love
           Of the dead, who is my bride.--

VII.     Of the dead--dead who lies
           All perfum'd there,
         With the death upon her eyes.
           And the life upon her hair.


VIII.    Thus on the coffin loud and long
           I strike--the murmur sent
         Through the gray chambers to my song,
           Shall be the accompaniment.


IX.      Thou diedst in thy life's June--
           But thou didst not die too fair:
         Thou didst not die too soon,
           Nor with too calm an air.


X.       From more than friends on earth,
           Thy life and love are riven,
         To join the untainted mirth
           Of more than thrones in heaven.--


XI.      Therefore, to thee this night
           I will no requiem raise,
         But waft thee on thy flight,
           With a Pan of old days.





       *       *       *       *       *





  Mysterious star!
  Thou wert my dream
  All a long summer night--
  Be now my theme!
  By this clear stream,
  Of thee will I write;
  Meantime from afar
  Bathe me in light!

  Thy world has not the dross of ours,
  Yet all the beauty--all the flowers
  That list our love or deck our bowers
  In dreamy gardens, where do lie
  Dreamy maidens all the day;
  While the silver winds of Circassy
  On violet couches faint away.
  Little--oh! little dwells in thee
  Like unto what on earth we see:
  Beauty's eye is here the bluest
  In the falsest and untruest--
  On the sweetest air doth float
  The most sad and solemn note--
  If with thee be broken hearts,
  Joy so peacefully departs,
  That its echo still doth dwell,
  Like the murmur in the shell.
  Thou! thy truest type of grief
  Is the gently falling leaf--
  Thou! thy framing is so holy
  Sorrow is not melancholy.



       *       *       *       *       *



31. The earliest version of "Tamerlane" was included in the suppressed
volume of 1827, but differs very considerably from the poem as now
published. The present draft, besides innumerable verbal alterations and
improvements upon the original, is more carefully punctuated, and, the
lines being indented, presents a more pleasing appearance, to the eye at
least.



       *       *       *       *       *



32. "To Helen" first appeared in the 1831 volume, as did also "The
Valley of Unrest" (as "The Valley Nis"), "Israfel," and one or two
others of the youthful pieces.

The poem styled "Romance" constituted the Preface of the 1829 volume,
but with the addition of the following lines:


  Succeeding years, too wild for song,
  Then rolled like tropic storms along,
  Where, though the garish lights that fly
  Dying along the troubled sky,
  Lay bare, through vistas thunder-riven,
  The blackness of the general Heaven,
  That very blackness yet doth fling
  Light on the lightning's silver wing.

  For being an idle boy lang syne,
  Who read Anacreon and drank wine,
  I early found Anacreon rhymes
  Were almost passionate sometimes--
  And by strange alchemy of brain
  His pleasures always turned to pain--
  His navet to wild desire--
  His wit to love--his wine to fire--
  And so, being young and dipt in folly,
  I fell in love with melancholy.

  And used to throw my earthly rest
  And quiet all away in jest--
  I could not love except where Death
  Was mingling his with Beauty's breath--
  Or Hymen, Time, and Destiny,
  Were stalking between her and me.

       *       *       *       *       *

  But _now_ my soul hath too much room--
  Gone are the glory and the gloom--
  The black hath mellow'd into gray,
  And all the fires are fading away.

  My draught of passion hath been deep--
  I revell'd, and I now would sleep--
  And after drunkenness of soul
  Succeeds the glories of the bowl--
  An idle longing night and day
  To dream my very life away.

  But dreams--of those who dream as I,
  Aspiringly, are damned, and die:
  Yet should I swear I mean alone,
  By notes so very shrilly blown,
  To break upon Time's monotone,
  While yet my vapid joy and grief
  Are tintless of the yellow leaf--
  Why not an imp the greybeard hath,
  Will shake his shadow in my path--
  And e'en the greybeard will o'erlook
  Connivingly my dreaming-book.





       *       *       *       *       *





                                 DOUBTFUL POEMS.





       *       *       *       *       *





ALONE.


  From childhood's hour I have not been
  As others were--I have not seen
  As others saw--I could not bring
  My passions from a common spring--
  From the same source I have not taken
  My sorrow--I could not awaken
  My heart to joy at the same tone--
  And all I loved--_I_ loved alone--
  _Thou_--in my childhood--in the dawn
  Of a most stormy life--was drawn
  From every depth of good and ill
  The mystery which binds me still--
  From the torrent, or the fountain--
  From the red cliff of the mountain--
  From the sun that round me roll'd
  In its autumn tint of gold--
  From the lightning in the sky
  As it passed me flying by--
  From the thunder and the storm--
  And the cloud that took the form
  (When the rest of Heaven was blue)
  Of a demon in my view.


March 17, 1829.





       *       *       *       *       *





TO ISADORE.


I.       Beneath the vine-clad eaves,
             Whose shadows fall before
             Thy lowly cottage door--
         Under the lilac's tremulous leaves--
         Within thy snowy clasped hand
             The purple flowers it bore.
         Last eve in dreams, I saw thee stand,
         Like queenly nymph from Fairy-land--
         Enchantress of the flowery wand,
             Most beauteous Isadore!


II.      And when I bade the dream
             Upon thy spirit flee,
             Thy violet eyes to me
         Upturned, did overflowing seem
         With the deep, untold delight
             Of Love's serenity;
         Thy classic brow, like lilies white
         And pale as the Imperial Night
         Upon her throne, with stars bedight,
             Enthralled my soul to thee!


III.     Ah! ever I behold
             Thy dreamy, passionate eyes,
             Blue as the languid skies
         Hung with the sunset's fringe of gold;
         Now strangely clear thine image grows,
             And olden memories
         Are startled from their long repose
         Like shadows on the silent snows
         When suddenly the night-wind blows
             Where quiet moonlight lies.


IV.      Like music heard in dreams,
             Like strains of harps unknown,
             Of birds for ever flown,--
         Audible as the voice of streams
         That murmur in some leafy dell,
             I hear thy gentlest tone,
         And Silence cometh with her spell
         Like that which on my tongue doth dwell,
         When tremulous in dreams I tell
             My love to thee alone!

V.       In every valley heard,
             Floating from tree to tree,
             Less beautiful to me,
         The music of the radiant bird,
         Than artless accents such as thine
             Whose echoes never flee!
         Ah! how for thy sweet voice I pine:--
         For uttered in thy tones benign
         (Enchantress!) this rude name of mine
             Doth seem a melody!





       *       *       *       *       *





THE VILLAGE STREET.


  In these rapid, restless shadows,
    Once I walked at eventide,
  When a gentle, silent maiden,
    Walked in beauty at my side.
  She alone there walked beside me
  All in beauty, like a bride.

  Pallidly the moon was shining
    On the dewy meadows nigh;
  On the silvery, silent rivers,
    On the mountains far and high,--
  On the ocean's star-lit waters,
    Where the winds a-weary die.

  Slowly, silently we wandered
    From the open cottage door,
  Underneath the elm's long branches
    To the pavement bending o'er;
  Underneath the mossy willow
    And the dying sycamore.

  With the myriad stars in beauty
    All bedight, the heavens were seen,
  Radiant hopes were bright around me,
    Like the light of stars serene;
  Like the mellow midnight splendor
    Of the Night's irradiate queen.

  Audibly the elm-leaves whispered
    Peaceful, pleasant melodies,
  Like the distant murmured music
    Of unquiet, lovely seas;
  While the winds were hushed in slumber
    In the fragrant flowers and trees.

  Wondrous and unwonted beauty
    Still adorning all did seem,
  While I told my love in fables
    'Neath the willows by the stream;
  Would the heart have kept unspoken
    Love that was its rarest dream!

  Instantly away we wandered
    In the shadowy twilight tide,
  She, the silent, scornful maiden,
    Walking calmly at my side,
  With a step serene and stately,
    All in beauty, all in pride.

  Vacantly I walked beside her.
    On the earth mine eyes were cast;
  Swift and keen there came unto me
    Bitter memories of the past--
  On me, like the rain in Autumn
    On the dead leaves, cold and fast.

  Underneath the elms we parted,
    By the lowly cottage door;
  One brief word alone was uttered--
    Never on our lips before;
  And away I walked forlornly,
  Broken-hearted evermore.

  Slowly, silently I loitered,
    Homeward, in the night, alone;
  Sudden anguish bound my spirit,
    That my youth had never known;
  Wild unrest, like that which cometh
    When the Night's first dream hath flown.

  Now, to me the elm-leaves whisper
    Mad, discordant melodies,
  And keen melodies like shadows
    Haunt the moaning willow trees,
  And the sycamores with laughter
    Mock me in the nightly breeze.

  Sad and pale the Autumn moonlight
    Through the sighing foliage streams;
  And each morning, midnight shadow,
    Shadow of my sorrow seems;
  Strive, O heart, forget thine idol!
    And, O soul, forget thy dreams!





       *       *       *       *       *





THE FOREST REVERIE.


      'Tis said that when
      The hands of men
    Tamed this primeval wood,
  And hoary trees with groans of wo,
  Like warriors by an unknown foe,
    Were in their strength subdued,
      The virgin Earth
      Gave instant birth
    To springs that ne'er did flow--
      That in the sun
      Did rivulets run,
  And all around rare flowers did blow--
      The wild rose pale
      Perfumed the gale,
  And the queenly lily adown the dale
      (Whom the sun and the dew
      And the winds did woo),
  With the gourd and the grape luxuriant grew.

      So when in tears
      The love of years
    Is wasted like the snow,
  And the fine fibrils of its life
  By the rude wrong of instant strife
    Are broken at a blow--
      Within the heart
      Do springs upstart
    Of which it doth now know,
      And strange, sweet dreams,
      Like silent streams
  That from new fountains overflow,
      With the earlier tide
      Of rivers glide
  Deep in the heart whose hope has died--
  Quenching the fires its ashes hide,--
    Its ashes, whence will spring and grow
      Sweet flowers, ere long,--
    The rare and radiant flowers of song!





       *       *       *       *       *




"_La musique_," says Marmontel, in those "Contes Moraux"[1] which in all
our translations we have insisted upon calling "Moral Tales," as if in
mockery of their spirit--"_la musique est le seul des talens qui jouisse
de lui-meme: tous les autres veulent des temoins_." He here confounds
the pleasure derivable from sweet sounds with the capacity for creating
them. No more than any other _talent_, is that for music susceptible of
complete enjoyment where there is no second party to appreciate its
exercise; and it is only in common with other talents that it produces
_effects_ which may be fully enjoyed in solitude. The idea which the
_raconteur_ has either failed to entertain clearly, or has sacrificed in
its expression to his national love of _point_, is doubtless the very
tenable one that the higher order of music is the most thoroughly
estimated when we are exclusively alone. The proposition in this form
will be admitted at once by those who love the lyre for its own sake and
for its spiritual uses. But there is one pleasure still within the reach
of fallen mortality, and perhaps only one, which owes even more than
does music to the accessory sentiment of seclusion. I mean the happiness
experienced in the contemplation of natural scenery. In truth, the man
who would behold aright the glory of God upon earth must in solitude
behold that glory. To me at least the presence, not of human life only,
but of life, in any other form than that of the green things which grow
upon the soil and are voiceless, is a stain upon the landscape, is at
war with the genius of the scene. I love, indeed, to regard the dark
valleys, and the gray rocks, and the waters that silently smile, and the
forests that sigh in uneasy slumbers, and the proud watchful mountains
that look down upon all,--I love to regard these as themselves but the
colossal members of one vast animate and sentient whole--a whole whose
form (that of the sphere) is the most perfect and most inclusive of all;
whose path is among associate planets; whose meek handmaiden is the
moon; whose mediate sovereign is the sun; whose life is eternity; whose
thought is that of a god; whose enjoyment is knowledge; whose destinies
are lost in immensity; whose cognizance of ourselves is akin with our
own cognizance of the _animalcul_ which infest the brain, a being which
we in consequence regard as purely inanimate and material, much in the
same manner as these _animalcul_ must thus regard us.

Our telescopes and our mathematical investigations assure us on every
hand, notwithstanding the cant of the more ignorant of the priesthood,
that space, and therefore that bulk, is an important consideration in
the eyes of the Almighty. The cycles in which the stars move are those
best adapted for the evolution, without collision, of the greatest
possible number of bodies. The forms of those bodies are accurately such
as within a given surface to include the greatest possible amount of
matter; while the surfaces themselves are so disposed as to accommodate
a denser population than could be accommodated on the same surfaces
otherwise arranged. Nor is it any argument against bulk being an object
with God that space itself is infinite; for there may be an infinity of
matter to fill it; and since we see clearly that the endowment of matter
with vitality is a principle--indeed, as far as our judgments extend,
the _leading_ principle in the operations of Deity, it is scarcely
logical to imagine it confined to the regions of the minute, where we
daily trace it, and not extending to those of the august. As we find
cycle within cycle without end, yet all revolving around one far-distant
centre which is the Godhead, may we not analogically suppose, in the
same manner, life within life, the less within the greater, and all
within the Spirit Divine? In short, we are madly erring through
self-esteem in believing man, in either his temporal or future
destinies, to be of more moment in the universe than that vast "clod of
the valley" which he tills and contemns, and to which he denies a soul,
for no more profound reason than that he does not behold it in operation
[2].

These fancies, and such as these, have always given to my meditations
among the mountains and the forests, by the rivers and the ocean, a
tinge of what the every-day world would not fail to term the fantastic.
My wanderings amid such scenes have been many and far-searching, and
often solitary; and the interest with which I have strayed through many
a dim deep valley, or gazed into the reflected heaven of many a bright
lake, has been an interest greatly deepened by the thought that I have
strayed and gazed _alone._ What flippant Frenchman [3] was it who said,
in allusion to the well known work of Zimmermann, that _"la solitude est
une belle chose; mais il faut quelqu'un pour vous dire que la solitude
est une belle chose"_? The epigram cannot be gainsaid; but the necessity
is a thing that does not exist.

It was during one of my lonely journeyings, amid a far distant region of
mountain locked within mountain, and sad rivers and melancholy tarns
writhing or sleeping within all, that I chanced upon a certain rivulet
and island. I came upon them suddenly in the leafy June, and threw
myself upon the turf beneath the branches of an unknown odorous shrub,
that I might doze as I contemplated the scene. I felt that thus only
should I look upon it, such was the character of phantasm which it wore.

On all sides, save to the west where the sun was about sinking, arose
the verdant walls of the forest. The little river which turned sharply
in its course, and was thus immediately lost to sight, seemed to have no
exit from its prison, but to be absorbed by the deep green foliage of
the trees to the east; while in the opposite quarter (so it appeared to
me as I lay at length and glanced upward) there poured down noiselessly
and continuously into the valley a rich golden and crimson waterfall
from the sunset fountains of the sky.

About midway in the short vista which my dreamy vision took in, one
small circular island, profusely verdured, reposed upon the bosom of the
stream.

  So blended bank and shadow there,
  That each seemed pendulous in air--

so mirror-like was the glassy water, that it was scarcely possible to
say at what point upon the slope of the emerald turf its crystal
dominion began. My position enabled me to include in a single view both
the eastern and western extremities of the islet, and I observed a
singularly-marked difference in their aspects. The latter was all one
radiant harem of garden beauties. It glowed and blushed beneath the eye
of the slant sunlight, and fairly laughed with flowers. The grass was
short, springy, sweet-scented, and Asphodel-interspersed. The trees were
lithe, mirthful, erect, bright, slender, and graceful, of eastern figure
and foliage, with bark smooth, glossy, and parti-colored. There seemed a
deep sense of life and joy about all, and although no airs blew from out
the heavens, yet everything had motion through the gentle sweepings to
and fro of innumerable butterflies, that might have been mistaken for
tulips with wings [4].

The other or eastern end of the isle was whelmed in the blackest shade.
A sombre, yet beautiful and peaceful gloom, here pervaded all things.
The trees were dark in color and mournful in form and attitude--
wreathing themselves into sad, solemn, and spectral shapes, that
conveyed ideas of mortal sorrow and untimely death. The grass wore the
deep tint of the cypress, and the heads of its blades hung droopingly,
and hither and thither among it were many small unsightly hillocks, low
and narrow, and not very long, that had the aspect of graves, but were
not, although over and all about them the rue and the rosemary
clambered. The shades of the trees fell heavily upon the water, and
seemed to bury itself therein, impregnating the depths of the element
with darkness. I fancied that each shadow, as the sun descended lower
and lower, separated itself sullenly from the trunk that gave it birth,
and thus became absorbed by the stream, while other shadows issued
momently from the trees, taking the place of their predecessors thus
entombed.

This idea having once seized upon my fancy greatly excited it, and I
lost myself forthwith in reverie. "If ever island were enchanted," said
I to myself, "this is it. This is the haunt of the few gentle Fays who
remain from the wreck of the race. Are these green tombs theirs?--or do
they yield up their sweet lives as mankind yield up their own? In dying,
do they not rather waste away mournfully, rendering unto God little by
little their existence, as these trees render up shadow after shadow,
exhausting their substance unto dissolution? What the wasting tree is to
the water that imbibes its shade, growing thus blacker by what it preys
upon, may not the life of the Fay be to the death which engulfs it?"

As I thus mused, with half-shut eyes, while the sun sank rapidly to
rest, and eddying currents careered round and round the island, bearing
upon their bosom large dazzling white flakes of the bark of the
sycamore, flakes which, in their multiform positions upon the water, a
quick imagination might have converted into anything it pleased; while I
thus mused, it appeared to me that the form of one of those very Fays
about whom I had been pondering, made its way slowly into the darkness
from out the light at the western end of the island. She stood erect in
a singularly fragile canoe, and urged it with the mere phantom of an
oar. While within the influence of the lingering sunbeams, her attitude
seemed indicative of joy, but sorrow deformed it as she passed within
the shade. Slowly she glided along, and at length rounded the islet and
re-entered the region of light. "The revolution which has just been made
by the Fay," continued I musingly, "is the cycle of the brief year of
her life. She has floated through her winter and through her summer. She
is a year nearer unto death: for I did not fail to see that as she came
into the shade, her shadow fell from her, and was swallowed up in the
dark water, making its blackness more black."

And again the boat appeared and the Fay, but about the attitude of the
latter there was more of care and uncertainty and less of elastic joy.
She floated again from out the light and into the gloom (which deepened
momently), and again her shadow fell from her into the ebony water, and
became absorbed into its blackness. And again and again she made the
circuit of the island (while the sun rushed down to his slumbers), and
at each issuing into the light there was more sorrow about her person,
while it grew feebler and far fainter and more indistinct, and at each
passage into the gloom there fell from her a darker shade, which became
whelmed in a shadow more black. But at length, when the sun had utterly
departed, the Fay, now the mere ghost of her former self, went
disconsolately with her boat into the region of the ebony flood, and
that she issued thence at all I cannot say, for darkness fell over all
things, and I beheld her magical figure no more.






       *       *       *       *       *





THE POWER OF WORDS.


'Oinos.'

  Pardon, Agathos, the weakness of a spirit new-fledged with
  immortality!


'Agathos.'

  You have spoken nothing, my Oinos, for which pardon is to be demanded.
  Not even here is knowledge a thing of intuition. For wisdom, ask of
  the angels freely, that it may be given!


'Oinos.'

  But in this existence I dreamed that I should be at once cognizant of
  all things, and thus at once happy in being cognizant of all.


'Agathos.'

  Ah, not in knowledge is happiness, but in the acquisition of
  knowledge! In forever knowing, we are forever blessed; but to know
  all, were the curse of a fiend.


'Oinos.'

  But does not The Most High know all?


'Agathos'.

  _That_ (since he is The Most Happy) must be still the _one_ thing
  unknown even to HIM.


'Oinos.'

  But, since we grow hourly in knowledge, must not _at last_ all things
  be known?


'Agathos.'

  Look down into the abysmal distances!--attempt to force the gaze down
  the multitudinous vistas of the stars, as we sweep slowly through them
  thus--and thus--and thus! Even the spiritual vision, is it not at all
  points arrested by the continuous golden walls of the universe?--the
  walls of the myriads of the shining bodies that mere number has
  appeared to blend into unity?


'Oinos'.

  I clearly perceive that the infinity of matter is no dream.


'Agathos'.

  There are no dreams in Aidenn--but it is here whispered that, of this
  infinity of matter, the _sole_ purpose is to afford infinite springs
  at which the soul may allay the thirst _to know_ which is forever
  unquenchable within it--since to quench it would be to extinguish the
  soul's self. Question me then, my Oinos, freely and without fear.
  Come! we will leave to the left the loud harmony of the Pleiades, and
  swoop outward from the throne into the starry meadows beyond Orion,
  where, for pansies and violets, and heart's-ease, are the beds of the
  triplicate and triple-tinted suns.


'Oinos'.

  And now, Agathos, as we proceed, instruct me!--speak to me in the
  earth's familiar tones! I understand not what you hinted to me just
  now of the modes or of the methods of what during mortality, we were
  accustomed to call Creation. Do you mean to say that the Creator is
  not God?


'Agathos'.

  I mean to say that the Deity does not create.


'Oinos'.

  Explain!


'Agathos'.

  In the beginning only, he created. The seeming creatures which are now
  throughout the universe so perpetually springing into being can only
  be considered as the mediate or indirect, not as the direct or
  immediate results of the Divine creative power.


'Oinos.'

  Among men, my Agathos, this idea would be considered heretical in the
  extreme.


'Agathos.'

  Among the angels, my Oinos, it is seen to be simply true.


'Oinos.'

  I can comprehend you thus far--that certain operations of what we term
  Nature, or the natural laws, will, under certain conditions, give rise
  to that which has all the _appearance_ of creation. Shortly before the
  final overthrow of the earth, there were, I well remember, many very
  successful experiments in what some philosophers were weak enough to
  denominate the creation of animalcul.


'Agathos.'

  The cases of which you speak were, in fact, instances of the secondary
  creation, and of the _only_ species of creation which has ever been
  since the first word spoke into existence the first law.


'Oinos.'

  Are not the starry worlds that, from the abyss of nonentity, burst
  hourly forth into the heavens--are not these stars, Agathos, the
  immediate handiwork of the King?


'Agathos.'

  Let me endeavor, my Oinos, to lead you, step by step, to the
  conception I intend. You are well aware that, as no thought can
  perish, so no act is without infinite result. We moved our hands, for
  example, when we were dwellers on the earth, and in so doing we gave
  vibration to the atmosphere which engirdled it. This vibration was
  indefinitely extended till it gave impulse to every particle of the
  earth's air, which thenceforward, _and forever_, was actuated by the
  one movement of the hand. This fact the mathematicians of our globe
  well knew. They made the special effects, indeed, wrought in the fluid
  by special impulses, the subject of exact calculation--so that it
  became easy to determine in what precise period an impulse of given
  extent would engirdle the orb, and impress (forever) every atom of the
  atmosphere circumambient. Retrograding, they found no difficulty; from
  a given effect, under given conditions, in determining the value of
  the original impulse. Now the mathematicians who saw that the results
  of any given impulse were absolutely endless--and who saw that a
  portion of these results were accurately traceable through the agency
  of algebraic analysis--who saw, too, the facility of the
  retrogradation--these men saw, at the same time, that this species of
  analysis itself had within itself a capacity for indefinite
  progress--that there were no bounds conceivable to its advancement and
  applicability, except within the intellect of him who advanced or
  applied it. But at this point our mathematicians paused.


'Oinos.'

  And why, Agathos, should they have proceeded?


'Agathos.'

  Because there were some considerations of deep interest beyond. It was
  deducible from what they knew, that to a being of infinite
  understanding--one to whom the _perfection_ of the algebraic analysis
  lay unfolded--there could be no difficulty in tracing every impulse
  given the air--and the ether through the air--to the remotest
  consequences at any even infinitely remote epoch of time. It is indeed
  demonstrable that every such impulse _given the air_, must _in the
  end_ impress every individual thing that exists _within the
  universe;_--and the being of infinite understanding--the being whom
  we have imagined--might trace the remote undulations of the
  impulse--trace them upward and onward in their influences upon all
  particles of all matter--upward and onward forever in their
  modifications of old forms--or, in other words, _in their creation of
  new_--until he found them reflected--unimpressive _at last_--back from
  the throne of the Godhead. And not only could such a being do this,
  but at any epoch, should a given result be afforded him--should one of
  these numberless comets, for example, be presented to his
  inspection--he could have no difficulty in determining, by the
  analytic retrogradation, to what original impulse it was due. This
  power of retrogradation in its absolute fulness and perfection--this
  faculty of referring at _all_ epochs, _all_ effects to _all_
  causes--is of course the prerogative of the Deity alone--but in every
  variety of degree, short of the absolute perfection, is the power
  itself exercised by the whole host of the Angelic Intelligences.


'Oinos'.

  But you speak merely of impulses upon the air.


'Agathos'.

  In speaking of the air, I referred only to the earth: but the general
  proposition has reference to impulses upon the ether--which, since it
  pervades, and alone pervades all space, is thus the great medium of
  _creation_.


'Oinos'.

  Then all motion, of whatever nature, creates?


'Agathos'.

  It must: but a true philosophy has long taught that the source of all
  motion is thought--and the source of all thought is--


'Oinos'.

  God.


'Agathos'.

  I have spoken to you, Oinos, as to a child, of the fair Earth which
  lately perished--of impulses upon the atmosphere of the earth.


'Oinos'.

  You did.


'Agathos'.

  And while I thus spoke, did there not cross your mind some thought of
  the _physical power of words_? Is not every word an impulse on the
  air?


'Oinos'.

  But why, Agathos, do you weep--and why, oh, why do your wings droop as
  we hover above this fair star--which is the greenest and yet most
  terrible of all we have encountered in our flight? Its brilliant
  flowers look like a fairy dream--but its fierce volcanoes like the
  passions of a turbulent heart.


'Agathos'.

  They _are_!--they _are_!--This wild star--it is now three centuries
  since, with clasped hands, and with streaming eyes, at the feet of my
  beloved--I spoke it--with a few passionate sentences--into birth. Its
  brilliant flowers _are_ the dearest of all unfulfilled dreams, and its
  raging volcanoes _are_ the passions of the most turbulent and
  unhallowed of hearts!





       *       *       *       *       *





THE COLLOQUY OF MONOS AND UNA.


  [Greek: Mellonta  sauta']

  These things are in the future.

  _Sophocles_--'Antig.'



'Una.'

  "Born again?"


'Monos.'

  Yes, fairest and best beloved Una, "born again." These were the words
  upon whose mystical meaning I had so long pondered, rejecting the
  explanations of the priesthood, until Death itself resolved for me the
  secret.


'Una.'

  Death!


'Monos.'

  How strangely, sweet _Una_, you echo my words! I observe, too, a
  vacillation in your step, a joyous inquietude in your eyes. You are
  confused and oppressed by the majestic novelty of the Life Eternal.
  Yes, it was of Death I spoke. And here how singularly sounds that word
  which of old was wont to bring terror to all hearts, throwing a mildew
  upon all pleasures!


'Una.'

  Ah, Death, the spectre which sate at all feasts! How often, Monos, did
  we lose ourselves in speculations upon its nature! How mysteriously
  did it act as a check to human bliss, saying unto it, "thus far, and
  no farther!" That earnest mutual love, my own Monos, which burned
  within our bosoms, how vainly did we flatter ourselves, feeling happy
  in its first upspringing that our happiness would strengthen with its
  strength! Alas, as it grew, so grew in our hearts the dread of that
  evil hour which was hurrying to separate us forever! Thus in time it
  became painful to love. Hate would have been mercy then.


'Monos'.

  Speak not here of these griefs, dear Una--mine, mine forever now!


'Una'.

  But the memory of past sorrow, is it not present joy? I have much to
  say yet of the things which have been. Above all, I burn to know the
  incidents of your own passage through the dark Valley and Shadow.


'Monos'.

  And when did the radiant Una ask anything of her Monos in vain? I will
  be minute in relating all, but at what point shall the weird narrative
  begin?


'Una'.

  At what point?


'Monos'.

  You have said.


'Una'.

  Monos, I comprehend you. In Death we have both learned the propensity
  of man to define the indefinable. I will not say, then, commence with
  the moment of life's cessation--but commence with that sad, sad
  instant when, the fever having abandoned you, you sank into a
  breathless and motionless torpor, and I pressed down your pallid
  eyelids with the passionate fingers of love.


'Monos'.

  One word first, my Una, in regard to man's general condition at this
  epoch. You will remember that one or two of the wise among our
  forefathers--wise in fact, although not in the world's esteem--had
  ventured to doubt the propriety of the term "improvement," as applied
  to the progress of our civilization. There were periods in each of the
  five or six centuries immediately preceding our dissolution when arose
  some vigorous intellect, boldly contending for those principles whose
  truth appears now, to our disenfranchised reason, so utterly obvious
  --principles which should have taught our race to submit to the
  guidance of the natural laws rather than attempt their control. At
  long intervals some master-minds appeared, looking upon each advance
  in practical science as a retrogradation in the true utility.
  Occasionally the poetic intellect--that intellect which we now feel to
  have been the most exalted of all--since those truths which to us were
  of the most enduring importance could only be reached by that
  _analogy_ which speaks in proof-tones to the imagination alone, and to
  the unaided reason bears no weight--occasionally did this poetic
  intellect proceed a step farther in the evolving of the vague idea of
  the philosophic, and find in the mystic parable that tells of the tree
  of knowledge, and of its forbidden fruit, death-producing, a distinct
  intimation that knowledge was not meet for man in the infant condition
  of his soul. And these men--the poets--living and perishing amid the
  scorn of the "utilitarians"--of rough pedants, who arrogated to
  themselves a title which could have been properly applied only to the
  scorned--these men, the poets, pondered piningly, yet not unwisely,
  upon the ancient days when our wants were not more simple than our
  enjoyments were keen--days when _mirth_ was a word unknown, so
  solemnly deep-toned was happiness--holy, august, and blissful days,
  blue rivers ran undammed, between hills unhewn, into far forest
  solitudes, primeval, odorous, and unexplored. Yet these noble
  exceptions from the general misrule served but to strengthen it by
  opposition. Alas! we had fallen upon the most evil of all our evil
  days. The great "movement"--that was the cant term--went on: a
  diseased commotion, moral and physical. Art--the Arts--arose supreme,
  and once enthroned, cast chains upon the intellect which had elevated
  them to power. Man, because he could not but acknowledge the majesty
  of Nature, fell into childish exultation at his acquired and
  still-increasing dominion over her elements. Even while he stalked a
  God in his own fancy, an infantine imbecility came over him. As might
  be supposed from the origin of his disorder, he grew infected with
  system, and with abstraction. He enwrapped himself in generalities.
  Among other odd ideas, that of universal equality gained ground; and
  in the face of analogy and of God--in despite of the loud warning
  voice of the laws of _gradation_ so visibly pervading all things in
  Earth and Heaven--wild attempts at an omniprevalent Democracy were
  made. Yet this evil sprang necessarily from the leading evil,
  Knowledge. Man could not both know and succumb. Meantime huge smoking
  cities arose, innumerable. Green leaves shrank before the hot breath
  of furnaces. The fair face of Nature was deformed as with the ravages
  of some loathsome disease. And methinks, sweet Una, even our
  slumbering sense of the forced and of the far-fetched might have
  arrested us here. But now it appears that we had worked out our own
  destruction in the perversion of our _taste_, or rather in the blind
  neglect of its culture in the schools. For, in truth, it was at this
  crisis that taste alone--that faculty which, holding a middle position
  between the pure intellect and the moral sense, could never safely
  have been disregarded--it was now that taste alone could have led us
  gently back to Beauty, to Nature, and to Life. But alas for the pure
  contemplative spirit and majestic intuition of Plato! Alas for the
  [Greek: mousichae]  which he justly regarded as an all-sufficient
  education for the soul! Alas for him and for it!--since both were most
  desperately needed, when both were most entirely forgotten or despised
  [1]. Pascal, a philosopher whom we both love, has said, how
  truly!--"_Que tout notre raisonnement se rduit  cder au
  sentiment;_" and it is not impossible that the sentiment of the
  natural, had time permitted it, would have regained its old ascendency
  over the harsh mathematical reason of the schools. But this thing was
  not to be. Prematurely induced by intemperance of knowledge, the old
  age of the world drew near. This the mass of mankind saw not, or,
  living lustily although unhappily, affected not to see. But, for
  myself, the Earth's records had taught me to look for widest ruin as
  the price of highest civilization. I had imbibed a prescience of our
  Fate from comparison of China the simple and enduring, with Assyria
  the architect, with Egypt the astrologer, with Nubia, more crafty than
  either, the turbulent mother of all Arts. In the history of these
  regions I met with a ray from the Future. The individual
  artificialities of the three latter were local diseases of the Earth,
  and in their individual overthrows we had seen local remedies applied;
  but for the infected world at large I could anticipate no regeneration
  save in death. That man, as a race, should not become extinct, I saw
  that he must be "_born again._"

  And now it was, fairest and dearest, that we wrapped our spirits,
  daily, in dreams. Now it was that, in twilight, we discoursed of the
  days to come, when the Art-scarred surface of the Earth, having
  undergone that purification which alone could efface its rectangular
  obscenities, should clothe itself anew in the verdure and the
  mountain-slopes and the smiling waters of Paradise, and be rendered at
  length a fit dwelling-place for man:--for man the Death-purged--for
  man to whose now exalted intellect there should be poison in knowledge
  no more--for the redeemed, regenerated, blissful, and now immortal,
  but still for the _material_, man.


'Una'.

  Well do I remember these conversations, dear Monos; but the epoch of
  the fiery overthrow was not so near at hand as we believed, and as the
  corruption you indicate did surely warrant us in believing. Men lived;
  and died individually. You yourself sickened, and passed into the
  grave; and thither your constant Una speedily followed you. And though
  the century which has since elapsed, and whose conclusion brings up
  together once more, tortured our slumbering senses with no impatience
  of duration, yet my Monos, it was a century still.


'Monos'.

  Say, rather, a point in the vague infinity. Unquestionably, it was in
  the Earth's dotage that I died. Wearied at heart with anxieties which
  had their origin in the general turmoil and decay, I succumbed to the
  fierce fever. After some few days of pain, and many of dreamy delirium
  replete with ecstasy, the manifestations of which you mistook for
  pain, while I longed but was impotent to undeceive you--after some
  days there came upon me, as you have said, a breathless and motionless
  torpor; and this was termed _Death_ by those who stood around me.

  Words are vague things. My condition did not deprive me of sentience.
  It appeared to me not greatly dissimilar to the extreme quiescence of
  him, who, having slumbered long and profoundly, lying motionless and
  fully prostrate in a mid-summer noon, begins to steal slowly back into
  consciousness, through the mere sufficiency of his sleep, and without
  being awakened by external disturbances.

  I breathed no longer. The pulses were still. The heart had ceased to
  beat. Volition had not departed, but was powerless. The senses were
  unusually active, although eccentrically so--assuming often each
  other's functions at random. The taste and the smell were inextricably
  confounded, and became one sentiment, abnormal and intense. The
  rose-water with which your tenderness had moistened my lips to the
  last, affected me with sweet fancies of flowers--fantastic flowers,
  far more lovely than any of the old Earth, but whose prototypes we
  have here blooming around us. The eye-lids, transparent and bloodless,
  offered no complete impediment to vision. As volition was in abeyance,
  the balls could not roll in their sockets--but all objects within the
  range of the visual hemisphere were seen with more or less
  distinctness; the rays which fell upon the external retina, or into
  the corner of the eye, producing a more vivid effect than those which
  struck the front or interior surface. Yet, in the former instance,
  this effect was so far anomalous that I appreciated it only as
  _sound_--sound sweet or discordant as the matters presenting
  themselves at my side were light or dark in shade--curved or angular
  in outline. The hearing, at the same time, although excited in degree,
  was not irregular in action--estimating real sounds with an
  extravagance of precision, not less than of sensibility. Touch had
  undergone a modification more peculiar. Its impressions were tardily
  received, but pertinaciously retained, and resulted always in the
  highest physical pleasure. Thus the pressure of your sweet fingers
  upon my eyelids, at first only recognized through vision, at length,
  long after their removal, filled my whole being with a sensual delight
  immeasurable. I say with a sensual delight. _All_ my perceptions were
  purely sensual. The materials furnished the passive brain by the
  senses were not in the least degree wrought into shape by the deceased
  understanding. Of pain there was some little; of pleasure there was
  much; but of moral pain or pleasure none at all. Thus your wild sobs
  floated into my ear with all their mournful cadences, and were
  appreciated in their every variation of sad tone; but they were soft
  musical sounds and no more; they conveyed to the extinct reason no
  intimation of the sorrows which gave them birth; while large and
  constant tears which fell upon my face, telling the bystanders of a
  heart which broke, thrilled every fibre of my frame with ecstasy
  alone. And this was in truth the _Death_ of which these bystanders
  spoke reverently, in low whispers--you, sweet Una, gaspingly, with
  loud cries.

  They attired me for the coffin--three or four dark figures which
  flitted busily to and fro. As these crossed the direct line of my
  vision they affected me as _forms;_ but upon passing to my side their
  images impressed me with the idea of shrieks, groans, and, other
  dismal expressions of terror, of horror, or of woe. You alone, habited
  in a white robe, passed in all directions musically about.

  The day waned; and, as its light faded away, I became possessed by a
  vague uneasiness--an anxiety such as the sleeper feels when sad real
  sounds fall continuously within his ear--low distant bell-tones,
  solemn, at long but equal intervals, and commingling with melancholy
  dreams. Night arrived; and with its shadows a heavy discomfort. It
  oppressed my limbs with the oppression of some dull weight, and was
  palpable. There was also a moaning sound, not unlike the distant
  reverberation of surf, but more continuous, which, beginning with the
  first twilight, had grown in strength with the darkness. Suddenly
  lights were brought into the rooms, and this reverberation became
  forthwith interrupted into frequent unequal bursts of the same sound,
  but less dreary and less distinct. The ponderous oppression was in a
  great measure relieved; and, issuing from the flame of each lamp (for
  there were many), there flowed unbrokenly into my ears a strain of
  melodious monotone. And when now, dear Una, approaching the bed upon
  which I lay outstretched, you sat gently by my side, breathing odor
  from your sweet lips, and pressing them upon my brow, there arose
  tremulously within my bosom, and mingling with the merely physical
  sensations which circumstances had called forth, a something akin to
  sentiment itself--a feeling that, half appreciating, half responded
  to your earnest love and sorrow; but this feeling took no root in the
  pulseless heart, and seemed indeed rather a shadow than a reality, and
  faded quickly away, first into extreme quiescence, and then into a
  purely sensual pleasure as before.

  And now, from the wreck and the chaos of the usual senses, there
  appeared to have arisen within me a sixth, all perfect. In its
  exercise I found a wild delight--yet a delight still physical,
  inasmuch as the understanding had in it no part. Motion in the animal
  frame had fully ceased. No muscle quivered; no nerve thrilled; no
  artery throbbed. But there seemed to have sprung up in the brain
  _that_ of which no words could convey to the merely human intelligence
  even an indistinct conception. Let me term it a mental pendulous
  pulsation. It was the moral embodiment of man's abstract idea of
  _Time_. By the absolute equalization of this movement--or of such as
  this--had the cycles of the firmamental orbs themselves been adjusted.
  By its aid I measured the irregularities of the clock upon the mantel,
  and of the watches of the attendants. Their tickings came sonorously
  to my ears. The slightest deviations from the true proportion--and
  these deviations were omniprevalent--affected me just as violations of
  abstract truth were wont on earth to affect the moral sense. Although
  no two of the timepieces in the chamber struck the individual seconds
  accurately together, yet I had no difficulty in holding steadily in
  mind the tones, and the respective momentary errors of each. And
  this--this keen, perfect self-existing sentiment of _duration_--this
  sentiment existing (as man could not possibly have conceived it to
  exist) independently of any succession of events--this idea--this
  sixth sense, upspringing from the ashes of the rest, was the first
  obvious and certain step of the intemporal soul upon the threshold of
  the temporal eternity.

  It was midnight; and you still sat by my side. All others had departed
  from the chamber of Death. They had deposited me in the coffin. The
  lamps burned flickeringly; for this I knew by the tremulousness of the
  monotonous strains. But suddenly these strains diminished in
  distinctness and in volume. Finally they ceased. The perfume in my
  nostrils died away. Forms affected my vision no longer. The oppression
  of the Darkness uplifted itself from my bosom. A dull shot like that
  of electricity pervaded my frame, and was followed by total loss of
  the idea of contact. All of what man has termed sense was merged in
  the sole consciousness of entity, and in the one abiding sentiment of
  duration. The mortal body had been at length stricken with the hand of
  the deadly _Decay_.

  Yet had not all of sentience departed; for the consciousness and the
  sentiment remaining supplied some of its functions by a lethargic
  intuition. I appreciated the direful change now in operation upon the
  flesh, and, as the dreamer is sometimes aware of the bodily presence
  of one who leans over him, so, sweet Una, I still dully felt that you
  sat by my side. So, too, when the noon of the second day came, I was
  not unconscious of those movements which displaced you from my side,
  which confined me within the coffin, which deposited me within the
  hearse, which bore me to the grave, which lowered me within it, which
  heaped heavily the mould upon me, and which thus left me, in blackness
  and corruption, to my sad and solemn slumbers with the worm.

  And here in the prison-house which has few secrets to disclose, there
  rolled away days and weeks and months; and the soul watched narrowly
  each second as it flew, and, without effort, took record of its
  flight--without effort and without object.

  A year passed. The consciousness of _being_ had grown hourly more
  indistinct, and that of mere _locality_ had in great measure usurped
  its position. The idea of entity was becoming merged in that of
  _place_. The narrow space immediately surrounding what had been the
  body was now growing to be the body itself. At length, as often
  happens to the sleeper (by sleep and its world alone is _Death_
  imaged)--at length, as sometimes happened on Earth to the deep
  slumberer, when some flitting light half startled him into awaking,
  yet left him half enveloped in dreams--so to me, in the strict embrace
  of the _Shadow_, came _that_ light which alone might have had power to
  startle--the light of enduring _Love_. Men toiled at the grave in
  which I lay darkling. They upthrew the damp earth. Upon my mouldering
  bones there descended the coffin of Una. And now again all was void.
  That nebulous light had been extinguished. That feeble thrill had
  vibrated itself into quiescence. Many _lustra_ had supervened. Dust
  had returned to dust. The worm had food no more. The sense of being
  had at length utterly departed, and there reigned in its stead--
  instead of all things, dominant and perpetual--the autocrats _Place_
  and _Time._ For _that_ which _was not_--for that which had no
  form--for that which had no thought--for that which had no
  sentience--for that which was soundless, yet of which matter formed no
  portion--for all this nothingness, yet for all this immortality, the
  grave was still a home, and the corrosive hours, co-mates.







       *       *       *       *       *





THE CONVERSATION OF EIROS AND CHARMION.


  I will bring fire to thee.

  _Euripides_.--'Androm'.



'Eiros'.

  Why do you call me Eiros?


'Charmion'.

  So henceforward will you always be called. You must forget, too, _my_
  earthly name, and speak to me as Charmion.


'Eiros'.

  This is indeed no dream!


'Charmion'.

  Dreams are with us no more;--but of these mysteries anon. I rejoice to
  see you looking life-like and rational. The film of the shadow has
  already passed from off your eyes. Be of heart, and fear nothing. Your
  allotted days of stupor have expired, and to-morrow I will myself
  induct you into the full joys and wonders of your novel existence.


'Eiros'.

  True--I feel no stupor--none at all. The wild sickness and the
  terrible darkness have left me, and I hear no longer that mad,
  rushing, horrible sound, like the "voice of many waters." Yet my
  senses are bewildered, Charmion, with the keenness of their perception
  of _the new_.


'Charmion'.

  A few days will remove all this;--but I fully understand you, and
  feel for you. It is now ten earthly years since I underwent what you
  undergo--yet the remembrance of it hangs by me still. You have now
  suffered all of pain, however, which you will suffer in Aidenn.


'Eiros'.

  In Aidenn?


'Charmion'.

  In Aidenn.


'Eiros'.

  O God!--pity me, Charmion!--I am overburthened with the majesty of all
  things--of the unknown now known--of the speculative Future merged in
  the august and certain Present.


'Charmion'.

  Grapple not now with such thoughts. To-morrow we will speak of this.
  Your mind wavers, and its agitation will find relief in the exercise
  of simple memories. Look not around, nor forward--but back. I am
  burning with anxiety to hear the details of that stupendous event
  which threw you among us. Tell me of it. Let us converse of familiar
  things, in the old familiar language of the world which has so
  fearfully perished.


'Eiros'.

  Most fearfully, fearfully!--this is indeed no dream.


'Charmion'.

  Dreams are no more. Was I much mourned, my Eiros?

'Eiros'.

  Mourned, Charmion?--oh, deeply. To that last hour of all there hung a
  cloud of intense gloom and devout sorrow over your household.


'Charmion'.

  And that last hour--speak of it. Remember that, beyond the naked fact
  of the catastrophe itself, I know nothing. When, coming out from among
  mankind, I passed into Night through the Grave--at that period, if I
  remember aright, the calamity which overwhelmed you was utterly
  unanticipated. But, indeed, I knew little of the speculative
  philosophy of the day.


'Eiros'.

  The individual calamity was, as you say, entirely unanticipated; but
  analogous misfortunes had been long a subject of discussion with
  astronomers. I need scarce tell you, my friend, that, even when you
  left us, men had agreed to understand those passages in the most holy
  writings which speak of the final destruction of all things by fire as
  having reference to the orb of the earth alone, But in regard to the
  immediate agency of the ruin, speculation had been at fault from that
  epoch in astronomical knowledge in which the comets were divested of
  the terrors of flame. The very moderate density of these bodies had
  been well established. They had been observed to pass among the
  satellites of Jupiter without bringing about any sensible alteration
  either in the masses or in the orbits of these secondary planets. We
  had long regarded the wanderers as vapory creations of inconceivable
  tenuity, and as altogether incapable of doing injury to our
  substantial globe, even in the event of contact. But contact was not
  in any degree dreaded; for the elements of all the comets were
  accurately known. That among _them_ we should look for the agency of
  the threatened fiery destruction had been for many years considered an
  inadmissible idea. But wonders and wild fancies had been of late days
  strangely rife among mankind; and, although it was only with a few of
  the ignorant that actual apprehension prevailed, upon the announcement
  by astronomers of a _new_ comet, yet this announcement was generally
  received with I know not what of agitation and mistrust.

  The elements of the strange orb were immediately calculated, and it
  was at once conceded by all observers that its path, at perihelion
  would bring it into very close proximity with the earth. There were
  two or three astronomers of secondary note who resolutely maintained
  that a contact was inevitable. I cannot very well express to you the
  effect of this intelligence upon the people. For a few short days they
  would not believe an assertion which their intellect, so long employed
  among worldly considerations, could not in any manner grasp. But the
  truth of a vitally important fact soon makes its way into the
  understanding of even the most stolid. Finally, all men saw that
  astronomical knowledge lies not, and they awaited the comet. Its
  approach was not at first seemingly rapid, nor was its appearance of
  very unusual character. It was of a dull red, and had little
  perceptible train. For seven or eight days we saw no material increase
  in its apparent diameter, and but a partial alteration in its color.
  Meantime, the ordinary affairs of men were discarded, and all interest
  absorbed in a growing discussion instituted by the philosophic in
  respect to the cometary nature. Even the grossly ignorant aroused
  their sluggish capacities to such considerations. The learned _now_
  gave their intellect--their soul--to no such points as the allaying of
  fear, or to the sustenance of loved theory. They sought--they panted
  for right views. They groaned for perfected knowledge. _Truth_ arose
  in the purity of her strength and exceeding majesty, and the wise
  bowed down and adored.

  That material injury to our globe or to its inhabitants would result
  from the apprehended contact was an opinion which hourly lost ground
  among the wise; and the wise were now freely permitted to rule the
  reason and the fancy of the crowd. It was demonstrated that the
  density of the comet's _nucleus_ was far less than that of our rarest
  gas; and the harmless passage of a similar visitor among the
  satellites of Jupiter was a point strongly insisted upon, and which
  served greatly to allay terror. Theologists, with an earnestness
  fear-enkindled, dwelt upon the biblical prophecies, and expounded them
  to the people with a directness and simplicity of which no previous
  instance had been known. That the final destruction of the earth must
  be brought about by the agency of fire, was urged with a spirit that
  enforced everywhere conviction; and that the comets were of no fiery
  nature (as all men now knew) was a truth which relieved all, in a
  great measure, from the apprehension of the great calamity foretold.
  It is noticeable that the popular prejudices and vulgar errors in
  regard to pestilences and wars--errors which were wont to prevail upon
  every appearance of a comet--were now altogether unknown, as if by
  some sudden convulsive exertion reason had at once hurled superstition
  from her throne. The feeblest intellect had derived vigor from
  excessive interest.

  What minor evils might arise from the contact were points of elaborate
  question. The learned spoke of slight geological disturbances, of
  probable alterations in climate, and consequently in vegetation; of
  possible magnetic and electric influences. Many held that no visible
  or perceptible effect would in any manner be produced. While such
  discussions were going on, their subject gradually approached, growing
  larger in apparent diameter, and of a more brilliant lustre. Mankind
  grew paler as it came. All human operations were suspended.

  There was an epoch in the course of the general sentiment when the
  comet had attained, at length, a size surpassing that of any
  previously recorded visitation. The people now, dismissing any
  lingering hope that the astronomers were wrong, experienced all the
  certainty of evil. The chimerical aspect of their terror was gone. The
  hearts of the stoutest of our race beat violently within their bosoms.
  A very few days suffered, however, to merge even such feelings in
  sentiments more unendurable. We could no longer apply to the strange
  orb any _accustomed_ thoughts. Its _historical_ attributes had
  disappeared. It oppressed us with a hideous _novelty_ of emotion. We
  saw it not as an astronomical phenomenon in the heavens, but as an
  incubus upon our hearts and a shadow upon our brains. It had taken,
  with unconceivable rapidity, the character of a gigantic mantle of
  rare flame, extending from horizon to horizon.

  Yet a day, and men breathed with greater freedom. It was clear that we
  were already within the influence of the comet; yet we lived. We even
  felt an unusual elasticity of frame and vivacity of mind. The
  exceeding tenuity of the object of our dread was apparent; for all
  heavenly objects were plainly visible through it. Meantime, our
  vegetation had perceptibly altered; and we gained faith, from this
  predicted circumstance, in the foresight of the wise. A wild
  luxuriance of foliage, utterly unknown before, burst out upon every
  vegetable thing.

  Yet another day--and the evil was not altogether upon us. It was now
  evident that its nucleus would first reach us. A wild change had come
  over all men; and the first sense of _pain_ was the wild signal for
  general lamentation and horror. The first sense of pain lay in a
  rigorous construction of the breast and lungs, and an insufferable
  dryness of the skin. It could not be denied that our atmosphere was
  radically affected; the conformation of this atmosphere and the
  possible modifications to which it might be subjected, were now the
  topics of discussion. The result of investigation sent an electric
  thrill of the intensest terror through the universal heart of man.

  It had been long known that the air which encircled us was a compound
  of oxygen and nitrogen gases, in the proportion of twenty-one measures
  of oxygen and seventy-nine of nitrogen in every one hundred of the
  atmosphere. Oxygen, which was the principle of combustion, and the
  vehicle of heat, was absolutely necessary to the support of animal
  life, and was the most powerful and energetic agent in nature.
  Nitrogen, on the contrary, was incapable of supporting either animal
  life or flame. An unnatural excess of oxygen would result, it had been
  ascertained, in just such an elevation of the animal spirits as we had
  latterly experienced. It was the pursuit, the extension of the idea,
  which had engendered awe. What would be the result of a _total
  extraction of the nitrogen_? A combustion irresistible, all-devouring,
  omni-prevalent, immediate;--the entire fulfilment, in all their
  minute and terrible details, of the fiery and horror-inspiring
  denunciations of the prophecies of the Holy Book.

  Why need I paint, Charmion, the now disenchained frenzy of mankind?
  That tenuity in the comet which had previously inspired us with hope,
  was now the source of the bitterness of despair. In its impalpable
  gaseous character we clearly perceived the consummation of Fate.
  Meantime a day again passed--bearing away with it the last shadow of
  Hope. We gasped in the rapid modification of the air. The red blood
  bounded tumultuously through its strict channels. A furious delirium
  possessed all men; and with arms rigidly outstretched towards the
  threatening heavens, they trembled and shrieked aloud. But the nucleus
  of the destroyer was now upon us;--even here in Aidenn I shudder while
  I speak. Let me be brief--brief as the ruin that overwhelmed. For a
  moment there was a wild lurid light alone, visiting and penetrating
  all things. Then--let us bow down, Charmion, before the excessive
  majesty of the great God!--then, there came a shouting and pervading
  sound, as if from the mouth itself of HIM; while the whole incumbent
  mass of ether in which we existed, burst at once into a species of
  intense flame, for whose surpassing brilliancy and all-fervid heat
  even the angels in the high Heaven of pure knowledge have no name.
  Thus ended all.





       *       *       *       *       *





SHADOW.--A PARABLE.


    Yea! though I walk through the valley of the _Shadow_.

    'Psalm of David'.


Ye who read are still among the living; but I who write shall have long
since gone my way into the region of shadows. For indeed strange things
shall happen, and secret things be known, and many centuries shall pass
away, ere these memorials be seen of men. And, when seen, there will be
some to disbelieve and some to doubt, and yet a few who will find much
to ponder upon in the characters here graven with a stylus of iron.

The year had been a year of terror, and of feeling more intense than
terror for which there is no name upon the earth. For many prodigies and
signs had taken place, and far and wide, over sea and land, the black
wings of the Pestilence were spread abroad. To those, nevertheless,
cunning in the stars, it was not unknown that the heavens wore an aspect
of ill; and to me, the Greek Oinos, among others, it was evident that
now had arrived the alternation of that seven hundred and ninety-fourth
year when, at the entrance of Aries, the planet Jupiter is enjoined with
the red ring of the terrible Saturnus. The peculiar spirit of the skies,
if I mistake not greatly, made itself manifest, not only in the physical
orb of the earth, but in the souls, imaginations, and meditations of
mankind.

Over some flasks of the red Chian wine, within the walls of a noble
hall, in a dim city called Ptolemais, we sat, at night, a company of
seven. And to our chamber there was no entrance save by a lofty door of
brass: and the door was fashioned by the artisan Corinnos, and, being of
rare workmanship, was fastened from within. Black draperies, likewise in
the gloomy room, shut out from our view the moon, the lurid stars, and
the peopleless streets--but the boding and the memory of Evil, they
would not be so excluded. There were things around us and about of which
I can render no distinct account--things material and spiritual--
heaviness in the atmosphere--a sense of suffocation--anxiety--and, above
all, that terrible state of existence which the nervous experience when
the senses are keenly living and awake, and meanwhile the powers of
thought lie dormant. A dead weight hung upon us. It hung upon our
limbs--upon the household furniture--upon the goblets from which we
drank; and all things were depressed, and borne down thereby--all things
save only the flames of the seven iron lamps which illumined our revel.
Uprearing themselves in tall slender lines of light, they thus remained
burning all pallid and motionless; and in the mirror which their lustre
formed upon the round table of ebony at which we sat each of us there
assembled beheld the pallor of his own countenance, and the unquiet
glare in the downcast eyes of his companions. Yet we laughed and were
merry in our proper way--which was hysterical; and sang the songs of
Anacreon--which are madness; and drank deeply--although the purple wine
reminded us of blood. For there was yet another tenant of our chamber in
the person of young Zoilus. Dead and at full length he lay,
enshrouded;--the genius and the demon of the scene. Alas! he bore no
portion in our mirth, save that his countenance, distorted with the
plague, and his eyes in which Death had but half extinguished the fire
of the pestilence, seemed to take such an interest in our merriment as
the dead may haply take in the merriment of those who are to die. But
although I, Oinos, felt that the eyes of the departed were upon me,
still I forced myself not to perceive the bitterness of their
expression, and gazing down steadily into the depths of the ebony
mirror, sang with a loud and sonorous voice the songs of the son of
Teos. But gradually my songs they ceased, and their echoes, rolling afar
off among the sable draperies of the chamber, became weak, and
undistinguishable, and so faded away. And lo! from among those sable
draperies, where the sounds of the song departed, there came forth a
dark and undefiled shadow--a shadow such as the moon, when low in
heaven, might fashion from the figure of a man: but it was the shadow
neither of man nor of God, nor of any familiar thing. And quivering
awhile among the draperies of the room it at length rested in full view
upon the surface of the door of brass. But the shadow was vague, and
formless, and indefinite, and was the shadow neither of man nor
God--neither God of Greece, nor God of Chalda, nor any Egyptian God.
And the shadow rested upon the brazen doorway, and under the arch of the
entablature of the door and moved not, nor spoke any word, but there
became stationary and remained. And the door whereupon the shadow rested
was, if I remember aright, over against the feet of the young Zoilus
enshrouded. But we, the seven there assembled, having seen the shadow as
it came out from among the draperies, dared not steadily behold it, but
cast down our eyes, and gazed continually into the depths of the mirror
of ebony. And at length I, Oinos, speaking some low words, demanded of
the shadow its dwelling and its appellation. And the shadow answered, "I
am SHADOW, and my dwelling is near to the Catacombs of Ptolemais, and
hard by those dim plains of Helusion which border upon the foul
Charonian canal." And then did we, the seven, start from our seats in
horror, and stand trembling, and shuddering, and aghast: for the tones
in the voice of the shadow were not the tones of any one being, but of a
multitude of beings, and varying in their cadences from syllable to
syllable, fell duskily upon our ears in the well remembered and familiar
accents of many thousand departed friends.





       *       *       *       *       *





SILENCE.--A FABLE.


The mountain pinnacles slumber; valleys, crags, and caves _are silent_.

"LISTEN to _me_," said the Demon, as he placed his hand upon my head.
"The region of which I speak is a dreary region in Libya, by the borders
of the river Zire. And there is no quiet there, nor silence.

"The waters of the river have a saffron and sickly hue; and they flow
not onward to the sea, but palpitate forever and forever beneath the red
eye of the sun with a tumultuous and convulsive motion. For many miles
on either side of the river's oozy bed is a pale desert of gigantic
water-lilies. They sigh one unto the other in that solitude, and stretch
towards the heaven their long and ghastly necks, and nod to and fro
their everlasting heads. And there is an indistinct murmur which cometh
out from among them like the rushing of subterrene water. And they sigh
one unto the other.

"But there is a boundary to their realm--the boundary of the dark,
horrible, lofty forest. There, like the waves about the Hebrides, the
low underwood is agitated continually. But there is no wind throughout
the heaven. And the tall primeval trees rock eternally hither and
thither with a crashing and mighty sound. And from their high summits,
one by one, drop everlasting dews. And at the roots, strange poisonous
flowers lie writhing in perturbed slumber. And overhead, with a rustling
and loud noise, the gray clouds rush westwardly forever until they roll,
a cataract, over the fiery wall of the horizon. But there is no wind
throughout the heaven. And by the shores of the river Zire there is
neither quiet nor silence.

"It was night, and the rain fell; and, falling, it was rain, but, having
fallen, it was blood. And I stood in the morass among the tall lilies,
and the rain fell upon my head--and the lilies sighed one unto the other
in the solemnity of their desolation.

"And, all at once, the moon arose through the thin ghastly mist, and was
crimson in color. And mine eyes fell upon a huge gray rock which stood
by the shore of the river and was lighted by the light of the moon. And
the rock was gray and ghastly, and tall,--and the rock was gray. Upon
its front were characters engraven in the stones; and I walked through
the morass of water-lilies, until I came close unto the shore, that I
might read the characters upon the stone. But I could not decipher them.
And I was going back into the morass when the moon shone with a fuller
red, and I turned and looked again upon the rock and upon the
characters;--and the characters were DESOLATION.

"And I looked upwards, and there stood a man upon the summit of the
rock; and I hid myself among the water-lilies that I might discover the
action of the man. And the man was tall and stately in form, and wrapped
up from his shoulders to his feet in the toga of old Rome. And the
outlines of his figure were indistinct--but his features were the
features of a deity; for the mantle of the night, and of the mist, and
of the moon, and of the dew, had left uncovered the features of his
face. And his brow was lofty with thought, and his eye wild with care;
and in the few furrows upon his cheek, I read the fables of sorrow, and
weariness, and disgust with mankind, and a longing after solitude.

"And the man sat upon the rock, and leaned his head upon his hand, and
looked out upon the desolation. He looked down into the low unquiet
shrubbery, and up into the tall primeval trees, and up higher at the
rustling heaven, and into the crimson moon. And I lay close within
shelter of the lilies, and observed the actions of the man. And the man
trembled in the solitude;--but the night waned, and he sat upon the
rock.

"And the man turned his attention from the heaven, and looked out upon
the dreary river Zire, and upon the yellow ghastly waters, and upon the
pale legions of the water-lilies. And the man listened to the sighs of
the water-lilies, and to the murmur that came up from among them. And I
lay close within my covert and observed the actions of the man. And the
man trembled in the solitude;--but the night waned, and he sat upon the
rock.

"Then I went down into the recesses of the morass, and waded afar in
among the wilderness of the lilies, and called unto the hippopotami
which dwelt among the fens in the recesses of the morass. And the
hippopotami heard my call, and came, with the behemoth, unto the foot of
the rock, and roared loudly and fearfully beneath the moon. And I lay
close within my covert and observed the actions of the man. And the man
trembled in the solitude;--but the night waned, and he sat upon the
rock.

"Then I cursed the elements with the curse of tumult; and a frightful
tempest gathered in the heaven, where before there had been no wind. And
the heaven became livid with the violence of the tempest--and the rain
beat upon the head of the man--and the floods of the river came
down--and the river was tormented into foam--and the water-lilies
shrieked within their beds--and the forest crumbled before the wind--and
the thunder rolled--and the lightning fell--and the rock rocked to its
foundation. And I lay close within my covert and observed the actions of
the man. And the man trembled in the solitude;--but the night waned, and
he sat upon the rock.

"Then I grew angry and cursed, with the curse of silence, the river, and
the lilies, and the wind, and the forest, and the heaven, and the
thunder, and the sighs of the water-lilies. And they became accursed,
and _were still._ And the moon ceased to totter up its pathway to
heaven--and the thunder died away--and the lightning did not flash--and
the clouds hung motionless--and the waters sunk to their level and
remained--and the trees ceased to rock--and the water-lilies sighed no
more--and the murmur was heard no longer from among them, nor any shadow
of sound throughout the vast illimitable desert. And I looked upon the
characters of the rock, and they were changed;--and the characters were
SILENCE.

"And mine eyes fell upon the countenance of the man, and his countenance
was wan with terror. And, hurriedly, he raised his head from his hand,
and stood forth upon the rock and listened. But there was no voice
throughout the vast illimitable desert, and the characters upon the rock
were SILENCE. And the man shuddered, and turned his face away, and fled
afar off, in haste, so that I beheld him no more."

...

Now there are fine tales in the volumes of the Magi--in the iron-bound,
melancholy volumes of the Magi. Therein, I say, are glorious histories
of the Heaven, and of the Earth, and of the mighty Sea--and of the Genii
that overruled the sea, and the earth, and the lofty heaven. There was
much lore, too, in the sayings which were said by the sybils; and holy,
holy things were heard of old by the dim leaves that trembled around
Dodona--but, as Allah liveth, that fable which the demon told me as he
sat by my side in the shadow of the tomb, I hold to be the most
wonderful of all! And as the Demon made an end of his story, he fell
back within the cavity of the tomb and laughed. And I could not laugh
with the Demon, and he cursed me because I could not laugh. And the lynx
which dwelleth forever in the tomb, came out therefrom, and lay down at
the feet of the Demon, and looked at him steadily in the face.





       *       *       *       *       *





                                   ESSAYS.





       *       *       *       *       *





THE POETIC PRINCIPLE.


In speaking of the Poetic Principle, I have no design to be either
thorough or profound. While discussing very much at random the
essentiality of what we call Poetry, my principal purpose will be to
cite for consideration some few of those minor English or American poems
which best suit my own taste, or which, upon my own fancy, have left the
most definite impression. By "minor poems" I mean, of course, poems of
little length. And here, in the beginning, permit me to say a few words
in regard to a somewhat peculiar principle, which, whether rightfully or
wrongfully, has always had its influence in my own critical estimate of
the poem. I hold that a long poem does not exist. I maintain that the
phrase, "a long poem," is simply a flat contradiction in terms.

I need scarcely observe that a poem deserves its title only inasmuch as
it excites, by elevating the soul. The value of the poem is in the ratio
of this elevating excitement. But all excitements are, through a psychal
necessity, transient. That degree of excitement which would entitle a
poem to be so called at all, cannot be sustained throughout a
composition of any great length. After the lapse of half an hour, at the
very utmost, it flags--fails--a revulsion ensues--and then the poem is,
in effect, and in fact, no longer such.

There are, no doubt, many who have found difficulty in reconciling the
critical dictum that the "Paradise Lost" is to be devoutly admired
throughout, with the absolute impossibility of maintaining for it,
during perusal, the amount of enthusiasm which that critical dictum
would demand. This great work, in fact, is to be regarded as poetical
only when, losing sight of that vital requisite in all works of Art,
Unity, we view it merely as a series of minor poems. If, to preserve its
Unity--its totality of effect or impression--we read it (as would be
necessary) at a single sitting, the result is but a constant alternation
of excitement and depression. After a passage of what we feel to be true
poetry, there follows, inevitably, a passage of platitude which no
critical prejudgment can force us to admire; but if, upon completing the
work, we read it again; omitting the first book--that is to say,
commencing with the second--we shall be surprised at now finding that
admirable which we before condemned--that damnable which we had
previously so much admired. It follows from all this that the ultimate,
aggregate, or absolute effect of even the best epic under the sun, is a
nullity--and this is precisely the fact.

In regard to the Iliad, we have, if not positive proof, at least very
good reason, for believing it intended as a series of lyrics; but,
granting the epic intention, I can say only that the work is based in an
imperfect sense of Art. The modern epic is, of the supposititious
ancient model, but an inconsiderate and blindfold imitation. But the day
of these artistic anomalies is over. If, at any time, any very long poem
_were_ popular in reality--which I doubt--it is at least clear that no
very long poem will ever be popular again.

That the extent of a poetical work is _ceteris paribus_, the measure of
its merit, seems undoubtedly, when we thus state it, a proposition
sufficiently absurd--yet we are indebted for it to the Quarterly
Reviews. Surely there can be nothing in mere _size_, abstractly
considered--there can be nothing in mere _bulk_, so far as a volume is
concerned, which has so continuously elicited admiration from these
saturnine pamphlets! A mountain, to be sure, by the mere sentiment of
physical magnitude which it conveys, _does_ impress us with a sense of
the sublime--but no man is impressed after _this_ fashion by the
material grandeur of even "The Columbiad." Even the Quarterlies have not
instructed us to be so impressed by it. _As yet_, they have not
_insisted_ on our estimating Lamartine by the cubic foot, or Pollock by
the pound--but what else are we to _infer_ from their continual prating
about "sustained effort"? If, by "sustained effort," any little
gentleman has accomplished an epic, let us frankly commend him for the
effort--if this indeed be a thing commendable--but let us forbear
praising the epic on the effort's account. It is to be hoped thai common
sense, in the time to come, will prefer deciding upon a work of Art
rather by the impression it makes--by the effect it produces--than by
the time it took to impress the effect, or by the amount of "sustained
effort" which had been found necessary in effecting the impression. The
fact is, that perseverance is one thing and genius quite another--nor
can all the Quarterlies in Christendom confound them. By and by, this
proposition, with many which I have been just urging, will be received
as self-evident. In the meantime, by being generally condemned as
falsities, they will not be essentially damaged as truths.

On the other hand, it is clear that a poem may be improperly brief.
Undue brevity degenerates into mere epigrammatism. A _very_ short poem,
while now and then producing a brilliant or vivid, never produces a
profound or enduring effect. There must be the steady pressing down of
the stamp upon the wax. De Branger has wrought innumerable things,
pungent and spirit-stirring, but in general they have been too
imponderous to stamp themselves deeply into the public attention, and
thus, as so many feathers of fancy, have been blown aloft only to be
whistled down the wind.

A remarkable instance of the effect of undue brevity in depressing a
poem, in keeping it out of the popular view, is afforded by the
following exquisite little Serenade:


  I arise from dreams of thee
    In the first sweet sleep of night
  When the winds are breathing low,
    And the stars are shining bright.
  I arise from dreams of thee,
    And a spirit in my feet
  Has led me--who knows how?--
    To thy chamber-window, sweet!

  The wandering airs they faint
    On the dark the silent stream--
  The champak odors fail
    Like sweet thoughts in a dream;
  The nightingale's complaint,
    It dies upon her heart,
  As I must die on thine,
    O, beloved as thou art!

  O, lift me from the grass!
    I die, I faint, I fail!
  Let thy love in kisses rain
    On my lips and eyelids pale.
  My cheek is cold and white, alas!
    My heart beats loud and fast:
  O, press it close to thine again,
    Where it will break at last!


Very few perhaps are familiar with these lines, yet no less a poet than
Shelley is their author. Their warm, yet delicate and ethereal
imagination will be appreciated by all, but by none so thoroughly as by
him who has himself arisen from sweet dreams of one beloved to bathe in
the aromatic air of a southern midsummer night.

One of the finest poems by Willis, the very best in my opinion which he
has ever written, has no doubt, through this same defect of undue
brevity, been kept back from its proper position, not less in the
critical than in the popular view:


  The shadows lay along Broadway,
    'Twas near the twilight-tide--
  And slowly there a lady fair
    Was walking in her pride.
  Alone walk'd she; but, viewlessly
    Walk'd spirits at her side.

  Peace charm'd the street beneath her feet,
    And honor charm'd the air;
  And all astir looked kind on her,
    And called her good as fair--
  For all God ever gave to her
    She kept with chary care.

  She kept with care her beauties rare
    From lovers warm and true--
  For heart was cold to all but gold,
    And the rich came not to woo--
  But honor'd well her charms to sell,
    If priests the selling do.

  Now walking there was one more fair--
    A slight girl, lily-pale;
  And she had unseen company
    To make the spirit quail--
  Twixt Want and Scorn she walk'd forlorn,
    And nothing could avail.

  No mercy now can clear her brow
    From this world's peace to pray,
  For as love's wild prayer dissolved in air,
    Her woman's heart gave way!--
  But the sin forgiven by Christ in Heaven,
    By man is cursed alway!


In this composition we find it difficult to recognise the Willis who has
written so many mere "verses of society." The lines are not only richly
ideal but full of energy, while they breathe an earnestness, an evident
sincerity of sentiment, for which we look in vain throughout all the
other works of this author.

While the epic mania, while the idea that to merit in poetry prolixity
is indispensable, has for some years past been gradually dying out of
the public mind, by mere dint of its own absurdity, we find it succeeded
by a heresy too palpably false to be long tolerated, but one which, in
the brief period it has already endured, may be said to have
accomplished more in the corruption of our Poetical Literature than all
its other enemies combined. I allude to the heresy of _The Didactic_. It
has been assumed, tacitly and avowedly, directly and indirectly, that
the ultimate object of all Poetry is truth. Every poem, it is said,
should inculcate a moral, and by this moral is the poetical merit of the
work to be adjudged. We Americans especially have patronized this happy
idea, and we Bostonians very especially have developed it in full. We
have taken it into our heads that to write a poem simply for the poem's
sake, and to acknowledge such to have been our design, would be to
confess ourselves radically wanting in the true poetic dignity and
force:--but the simple fact is that would we but permit ourselves to
look into our own souls we should immediately there discover that under
the sun there neither exists nor _can_ exist any work more thoroughly
dignified, more supremely noble, than this very poem, this poem _per
se_, this poem which is a poem and nothing more, this poem written
solely for the poem's sake.

With as deep a reverence for the True as ever inspired the bosom of man,
I would nevertheless limit, in some measure, its modes of inculcation. I
would limit to enforce them. I would not enfeeble them by dissipation.
The demands of Truth are severe. She has no sympathy with the myrtles.
All _that_ which is so indispensable in Song is precisely all _that_
with which _she_ has nothing whatever to do. It is but making her a
flaunting paradox to wreathe her in gems and flowers. In enforcing a
truth we need severity rather than efflorescence of language. We must be
simple, precise, terse. We must be cool, calm, unimpassioned. In a word,
we must be in that mood which, as nearly as possible, is the exact
converse of the poetical. _He_ must be blind indeed who does not
perceive the radical and chasmal difference between the truthful and the
poetical modes of inculcation. He must be theory-mad beyond redemption
who, in spite of these differences, shall still persist in attempting to
reconcile the obstinate oils and waters of Poetry and Truth.

Dividing the world of mind into its three most immediately obvious
distinctions, we have the Pure Intellect, Taste, and the Moral Sense. I
place Taste in the middle because it is just this position which in the
mind it occupies. It holds intimate relations with either extreme; but
from the Moral Sense is separated by so faint a difference that
Aristotle has not hesitated to place some of its operations among the
virtues themselves. Nevertheless we find the _offices_ of the trio
marked with a sufficient distinction. Just as the Intellect concerns
itself with Truth, so Taste informs us of the Beautiful, while the Moral
Sense is regardful of Duty. Of this latter, while Conscience teaches the
obligation, and Reason the expediency, Taste contents herself with
displaying the charms, waging war upon Vice solely on the ground of her
deformity, her disproportion, her animosity to the fitting, to the
appropriate, to the harmonious, in a word, to Beauty.

An immortal instinct deep within the spirit of man is thus plainly a
sense of the Beautiful. This it is which administers to his delight in
the manifold forms, and sounds, and odors, and sentiments amid which he
exists. And just as the lily is repeated in the lake, or the eyes of
Amaryllis in the mirror, so is the mere oral or written repetition of
these forms, and sounds, and colors, and odors, and sentiments a
duplicate source of delight. But this mere repetition is not poetry. He
who shall simply sing, with however glowing enthusiasm, or with however
vivid a truth of description, of the sights, and sounds, and odors, and
colors, and sentiments which greet him in common with all mankind--he, I
say, has yet failed to prove his divine title. There is still a
something in the distance which he has been unable to attain. We have
still a thirst unquenchable, to allay which he has not shown us the
crystal springs. This thirst belongs to the immortality of man. It is at
once a consequence and an indication of his perennial existence. It is
the desire of the moth for the star. It is no mere appreciation of the
Beauty before us, but a wild effort to reach the Beauty above. Inspired
by an ecstatic prescience of the glories beyond the grave, we struggle
by multiform combinations among the things and thoughts of Time to
attain a portion of that Loveliness whose very elements perhaps
appertain to eternity alone. And thus when by Poetry, or when by Music,
the most entrancing of the poetic moods, we find ourselves melted into
tears, we weep then, not as the Abbate Gravina supposes, through excess
of pleasure, but through a certain petulant, impatient sorrow at our
inability to grasp _now_, wholly, here on earth, at once and forever,
those divine and rapturous joys of which _through_ the poem, or
_through_ the music, we attain to but brief and indeterminate glimpses.

The struggle to apprehend the supernal Loveliness--this struggle, on the
part of souls fittingly constituted--has given to the world all _that_
which it (the world) has ever been enabled at once to understand and _to
feel_ as poetic.

The Poetic Sentiment, of course, may develop itself in various modes--in
Painting, in Sculpture, in Architecture, in the Dance--very especially
in Music--and very peculiarly, and with a wide field, in the composition
of the Landscape Garden. Our present theme, however, has regard only to
its manifestation in words. And here let me speak briefly on the topic
of rhythm. Contenting myself with the certainty that Music, in its
various modes of metre, rhythm, and rhyme, is of so vast a moment in
Poetry as never to be wisely rejected--is so vitally important an
adjunct, that he is simply silly who declines its assistance, I will not
now pause to maintain its absolute essentiality. It is in Music perhaps
that the soul most nearly attains the great end for which, when inspired
by the poetic Sentiment, it struggles--the creation of supernal Beauty.
It _may_ be, indeed, that here this sublime end is, now and, then,
attained in _fact._ We are often made to feel, with a shivering delight,
that from an earthly harp are stricken notes which _cannot_ have been
unfamiliar to the angels. And thus there can be little doubt that in the
union of Poetry with Music in its popular sense, we shall find the
widest field for the Poetic development. The old Bards and Minnesingers
had advantages which we do not possess--and Thomas Moore, singing his
own songs, was, in the most legitimate manner, perfecting them as poems.

To recapitulate then:--I would define, in brief, the Poetry of words as
_The Rhythmical Creation of Beauty._ Its sole arbiter is Taste. With the
Intellect or with the Conscience it has only collateral relations.
Unless incidentally, it has no concern whatever either with Duty or with
Truth.

A few words, however, in explanation. _That_ pleasure which is at once
the most pure, the most elevating, and the most intense, is derived, I
maintain, from the contemplation of the Beautiful. In the contemplation
of Beauty we alone find it possible to attain that pleasurable
elevation, or excitement _of the soul_, which we recognize as the Poetic
Sentiment, and which is so easily distinguished from Truth, which is the
satisfaction of the Reason, or from Passion, which is the excitement of
the heart. I make Beauty, therefore--using the word as inclusive of the
sublime--I make Beauty the province of the poem, simply because it is an
obvious rule of Art that effects should be made to spring as directly as
possible from their causes:--no one as yet having been weak enough to
deny that the peculiar elevation in question is at least _most readily_
attainable in the poem. It by no means follows, however, that the
incitements of Passion, or the precepts of Duty, or even the lessons of
Truth, may not be introduced into a poem, and with advantage; for they
may subserve incidentally, in various ways, the general purposes of the
work: but the true artist will always contrive to tone them down in
proper subjection to that Beauty which is the atmosphere and the real
essence of the poem.

I cannot better introduce the few poems which I shall present for your
consideration, than by the citation of the Prem to Longfellow's "Waif":


  The day is done, and the darkness
    Falls from the wings of Night,
  As a feather is wafted downward
    From an eagle in his flight.

  I see the lights of the village
    Gleam through the rain and the mist,
  And a feeling of sadness comes o'er me,
    That my soul cannot resist;

  A feeling of sadness and longing,
    That is not akin to pain,
  And resembles sorrow only
    As the mist resembles the rain.

  Come, read to me some poem,
    Some simple and heartfelt lay,
  That shall soothe this restless feeling,
    And banish the thoughts of day.

  Not from the grand old masters,
    Not from the bards sublime,
  Whose distant footsteps echo
    Through the corridors of Time.

  For, like strains of martial music,
    Their mighty thoughts suggest
  Life's endless toil and endeavor;
    And to-night I long for rest.

  Read from some humbler poet,
    Whose songs gushed from his heart,
  As showers from the clouds of summer,
    Or tears from the eyelids start;

  Who through long days of labor,
    And nights devoid of ease,
  Still heard in his soul the music
    Of wonderful melodies.

  Such songs have power to quiet
    The restless pulse of care,
  And come like the benediction
    That follows after prayer.

  Then read from the treasured volume
    The poem of thy choice,
  And lend to the rhyme of the poet
    The beauty of thy voice.

  And the night shall be filled with music,
    And the cares that infest the day,
  Shall fold their tents like the Arabs,
    And as silently steal away.


With no great range of imagination, these lines have been justly admired
for their delicacy of expression. Some of the images are very effective.
Nothing can be better than


           --the bards sublime,
    Whose distant footsteps echo
  Down the corridors of Time.


The idea of the last quatrain is also very effective. The poem on the
whole, however, is chiefly to be admired for the graceful _insouciance_
of its metre, so well in accordance with the character of the
sentiments, and especially for the _ease_ of the general manner. This
"ease" or naturalness, in a literary style, it has long been the fashion
to regard as ease in appearance alone--as a point of really difficult
attainment. But not so:--a natural manner is difficult only to him who
should never meddle with it--to the unnatural. It is but the result of
writing with the understanding, or with the instinct, that _the tone_,
in composition, should always be that which the mass of mankind would
adopt--and must perpetually vary, of course, with the occasion. The
author who, after the fashion of _The North American Review_, should be
upon _all_ occasions merely "quiet," must necessarily upon _many_
occasions be simply silly, or stupid; and has no more right to be
considered "easy" or "natural" than a Cockney exquisite, or than the
sleeping Beauty in the waxworks.

Among the minor poems of Bryant, none has so much impressed me as the
one which he entitles "June." I quote only a portion of it:


  There, through the long, long summer hours,
    The golden light should lie,
  And thick young herbs and groups of flowers
    Stand in their beauty by.
  The oriole should build and tell
  His love-tale, close beside my cell;
    The idle butterfly
  Should rest him there, and there be heard
  The housewife-bee and humming bird.

  And what, if cheerful shouts at noon,
    Come, from the village sent,
  Or songs of maids, beneath the moon,
    With fairy laughter blent?
  And what if, in the evening light,
  Betrothed lovers walk in sight
    Of my low monument?
  I would the lovely scene around
  Might know no sadder sight nor sound.

  I know, I know I should not see
    The season's glorious show,
  Nor would its brightness shine for me;
    Nor its wild music flow;

  But if, around my place of sleep,
  The friends I love should come to weep,
    They might not haste to go.
  Soft airs and song, and light and bloom,
  Should keep them lingering by my tomb.

  These to their soften'd hearts should bear
    The thought of what has been,
  And speak of one who cannot share
    The gladness of the scene;
  Whose part in all the pomp that fills
  The circuit of the summer hills,
    Is--that his grave is green;
  And deeply would their hearts rejoice
  To hear again his living voice.


The rhythmical flow here is even voluptuous--nothing could be more
melodious. The poem has always affected me in a remarkable manner. The
intense melancholy which seems to well up, perforce, to the surface of
all the poet's cheerful sayings about his grave, we find thrilling us to
the soul--while there is the truest poetic elevation in the thrill. The
impression left is one of a pleasurable sadness. And if, in the
remaining compositions which I shall introduce to you, there be more or
less of a similar tone always apparent, let me remind you that (how or
why we know not) this certain taint of sadness is inseparably connected
with all the higher manifestations of true Beauty. It is, nevertheless,


  A feeling of sadness and longing
    That is not akin to pain,
  And resembles sorrow only
    As the mist resembles the rain.


The taint of which I speak is clearly perceptible even in a poem so full
of brilliancy and spirit as "The Health" of Edward Coote Pinkney:


  I fill this cup to one made up
    Of loveliness alone,
  A woman, of her gentle sex
    The seeming paragon;
  To whom the better elements
    And kindly stars have given
  A form so fair, that like the air,
    'Tis less of earth than heaven.

  Her every tone is music's own,
    Like those of morning birds,
  And something more than melody
    Dwells ever in her words;
  The coinage of her heart are they,
    And from her lips each flows
  As one may see the burden'd bee
    Forth issue from the rose.

  Affections are as thoughts to her,
    The measures of her hours;
  Her feelings have the fragrancy,
    The freshness of young flowers;
  And lovely passions, changing oft,
    So fill her, she appears
  The image of themselves by turns,--
    The idol of past years!

  Of her bright face one glance will trace
    A picture on the brain,
  And of her voice in echoing hearts
    A sound must long remain;
  But memory, such as mine of her,
    So very much endears,
  When death is nigh my latest sigh
    Will not be life's, but hers.

  I fill'd this cup to one made up
    Of loveliness alone,
  A woman, of her gentle sex
    The seeming paragon--
  Her health! and would on earth there stood,
    Some more of such a frame,
  That life might be all poetry,
    And weariness a name.


It was the misfortune of Mr. Pinkney to have been born too far south.
Had he been a New Englander, it is probable that he would have been
ranked as the first of American lyrists by that magnanimous cabal which
has so long controlled the destinies of American Letters, in conducting
the thing called 'The North American Review'. The poem just cited is
especially beautiful; but the poetic elevation which it induces we must
refer chiefly to our sympathy in the poet's enthusiasm. We pardon his
hyperboles for the evident earnestness with which they are uttered.

It was by no means my design, however, to expatiate upon the _merits_
of what I should read you. These will necessarily speak for themselves.
Boccalina, in his 'Advertisements from Parnassus', tells us that Zoilus
once presented Apollo a very caustic criticism upon a very admirable
book:--whereupon the god asked him for the beauties of the work. He
replied that he only busied himself about the errors. On hearing this,
Apollo, handing him a sack of unwinnowed wheat, bade him pick out _all
the chaff_ for his reward.

Now this fable answers very well as a hit at the critics--but I am by no
means sure that the god was in the right. I am by no means certain that
the true limits of the critical duty are not grossly misunderstood.
Excellence, in a poem especially, may be considered in the light of an
axiom, which need only be properly _put_, to become self-evident. It is
_not_ excellence if it require to be demonstrated its such:--and thus to
point out too particularly the merits of a work of Art, is to admit that
they are _not_ merits altogether.

Among the "Melodies" of Thomas Moore is one whose distinguished
character as a poem proper seems to have been singularly left out of
view. I allude to his lines beginning--"Come, rest in this bosom." The
intense energy of their expression is not surpassed by anything in
Byron. There are two of the lines in which a sentiment is conveyed that
embodies the _all in all_ of the divine passion of Love--a sentiment
which, perhaps, has found its echo in more, and in more passionate,
human hearts that any other single sentiment ever embodied in words:


  Come, rest in this bosom, my own stricken deer,
  Though the herd have fled from thee, thy home is still here;
  Here still is the smile, that no cloud can o'ercast,
  And a heart and a hand all thy own to the last.

  Oh! what was love made for, if 'tis not the same
  Through joy and through torment, through glory and shame?
  I know not, I ask not, if guilt's in that heart,
  I but know that I love thee, whatever thou art.

  Thou hast call'd me thy Angel in moments of bliss,
  And thy Angel I'll be,'mid the horrors of this,--
  Through the furnace, unshrinking, thy steps to pursue,
  And shield thee, and save thee,--or perish there too!


It has been the fashion of late days to deny Moore Imagination, while
granting him Fancy--a distinction originating with Coleridge--than whom
no man more fully comprehended the great powers of Moore. The fact is,
that the fancy of this poet so far predominates over all his other
faculties, and over the fancy of all other men, as to have induced, very
naturally, the idea that he is fanciful _only._ But never was there a
greater mistake. Never was a grosser wrong done the fame of a true poet.
In the compass of the English language I can call to mind no poem more
profoundly--more weirdly _imaginative,_ in the best sense, than the
lines commencing--"I would I were by that dim lake"--which are the
composition of Thomas Moore. I regret that I am unable to remember them.

One of the noblest--and, speaking of Fancy--one of the most singularly
fanciful of modern poets, was Thomas Hood. His "Fair Ines" had always
for me an inexpressible charm:


  O saw ye not fair Ines?
    She's gone into the West,
  To dazzle when the sun is down
    And rob the world of rest
  She took our daylight with her,
    The smiles that we love best,
  With morning blushes on her cheek,
    And pearls upon her breast.

  O turn again, fair Ines,
    Before the fall of night,
  For fear the moon should shine alone,
    And stars unrivall'd bright;
  And blessed will the lover be
    That walks beneath their light,
  And breathes the love against thy cheek
    I dare not even write!

  Would I had been, fair Ines,
    That gallant cavalier,
  Who rode so gaily by thy side,
    And whisper'd thee so near!
  Were there no bonny dames at home,
    Or no true lovers here,
  That he should cross the seas to win
    The dearest of the dear?

  I saw thee, lovely Ines,
    Descend along the shore,
  With bands of noble gentlemen,
    And banners-waved before;
  And gentle youth and maidens gay,
    And snowy plumes they wore;
  It would have been a beauteous dream,
    If it had been no more!

  Alas, alas, fair Ines,
    She went away with song,
  With Music waiting on her steps,
    And shoutings of the throng;
  But some were sad and felt no mirth,
    But only Music's wrong,
  In sounds that sang Farewell, Farewell,
    To her you've loved so long.

  Farewell, farewell, fair Ines,
    That vessel never bore
  So fair a lady on its deck,
    Nor danced so light before,--
  Alas for pleasure on the sea,
    And sorrow on the shore!
  The smile that blest one lover's heart
    Has broken many more!


"The Haunted House," by the same author, is one of the truest poems ever
written,--one of the truest, one of the most unexceptionable, one of the
most thoroughly artistic, both in its theme and in its execution. It is,
moreover, powerfully ideal--imaginative. I regret that its length
renders it unsuitable for the purposes of this lecture. In place of it
permit me to offer the universally appreciated "Bridge of Sighs:"


  One more Unfortunate,
  Weary of breath,
  Rashly importunate
  Gone to her death!

  Take her up tenderly,
  Lift her with care;--
  Fashion'd so slenderly,
  Young and so fair!

  Look at her garments
  Clinging like cerements;
  Whilst the wave constantly
  Drips from her clothing;
  Take her up instantly,
  Loving, not loathing.

  Touch her not scornfully
  Think of her mournfully,
  Gently and humanly;
  Not of the stains of her,
  All that remains of her
  Now is pure womanly.

  Make no deep scrutiny
  Into her mutiny
  Rash and undutiful;
  Past all dishonor,
  Death has left on her
  Only the beautiful.

  Where the lamps quiver
  So far in the river,
  With many a light
  From window and casement,
  From garret to basement,
  She stood, with amazement,
  Houseless by night.

  The bleak wind of March
  Made her tremble and shiver;
  But not the dark arch,
  Or the black flowing river:
  Mad from life's history,
  Glad to death's mystery,
  Swift to be hurl'd--
  Anywhere, anywhere
  Out of the world!

  In she plunged boldly,
  No matter how coldly
  The rough river ran,--
  Over the brink of it,
  Picture it,--think of it,
  Dissolute Man!
  Lave in it, drink of it
  Then, if you can!

  Still, for all slips of hers,
  One of Eve's family--
  Wipe those poor lips of hers
  Oozing so clammily,
  Loop up her tresses
  Escaped from the comb,
  Her fair auburn tresses;
  Whilst wonderment guesses
  Where was her home?

  Who was her father?
  Who was her mother!
  Had she a sister?
  Had she a brother?
  Or was there a dearer one
  Still, and a nearer one
  Yet, than all other?

  Alas! for the rarity
  Of Christian charity
  Under the sun!
  Oh! it was pitiful!
  Near a whole city full,
  Home she had none.

  Sisterly, brotherly,
  Fatherly, motherly,
  Feelings had changed:
  Love, by harsh evidence,
  Thrown from its eminence;
  Even God's providence
  Seeming estranged.

  Take her up tenderly;
  Lift her with care;
  Fashion'd so slenderly,
  Young, and so fair!
  Ere her limbs frigidly
  Stiffen too rigidly,
  Decently,--kindly,--
  Smooth and compose them;
  And her eyes, close them,
  Staring so blindly!

  Dreadfully staring
  Through muddy impurity,
  As when with the daring
  Last look of despairing
  Fixed on futurity.

  Perishing gloomily,
  Spurred by contumely,
  Cold inhumanity,
  Burning insanity,
  Into her rest,--
  Cross her hands humbly,
  As if praying dumbly,
  Over her breast!
  Owning her weakness,
  Her evil behavior,
  And leaving, with meekness,
  Her sins to her Saviour!


The vigor of this poem is no less remarkable than its pathos. The
versification, although carrying the fanciful to the very verge of the
fantastic, is nevertheless admirably adapted to the wild insanity which
is the thesis of the poem.

Among the minor poems of Lord Byron is one which has never received from
the critics the praise which it undoubtedly deserves:


  Though the day of my destiny's over,
    And the star of my fate hath declined,
  Thy soft heart refused to discover
    The faults which so many could find;
  Though thy soul with my grief was acquainted,
    It shrunk not to share it with me,
  And the love which my spirit hath painted
    It never hath found but in _thee._

  Then when nature around me is smiling,
    The last smile which answers to mine,
  I do not believe it beguiling,
    Because it reminds me of thine;
  And when winds are at war with the ocean,
    As the breasts I believed in with me,
  If their billows excite an emotion,
    It is that they bear me from _thee._

  Though the rock of my last hope is shivered,
    And its fragments are sunk in the wave,
  Though I feel that my soul is delivered
    To pain--it shall not be its slave.
  There is many a pang to pursue me:
    They may crush, but they shall not contemn--
  They may torture, but shall not subdue me--
    'Tis of _thee_ that I think--not of them.

  Though human, thou didst not deceive me,
    Though woman, thou didst not forsake,
  Though loved, thou forborest to grieve me,
    Though slandered, thou never couldst shake,--
  Though trusted, thou didst not disclaim me,
    Though parted, it was not to fly,
  Though watchful, 'twas not to defame me,
    Nor mute, that the world might belie.

  Yet I blame not the world, nor despise it,
    Nor the war of the many with one--
  If my soul was not fitted to prize it,
    'Twas folly not sooner to shun:
  And if dearly that error hath cost me,
    And more than I once could foresee,
  I have found that whatever it lost me,
    It could not deprive me of _thee_.

  From the wreck of the past, which hath perished,
    Thus much I at least may recall,
  It hath taught me that which I most cherished
    Deserved to be dearest of all:
  In the desert a fountain is springing,
    In the wide waste there still is a tree,
  And a bird in the solitude singing,
    Which speaks to my spirit of _thee_.


Although the rhythm here is one of the most difficult, the versification
could scarcely be improved. No nobler theme ever engaged the pen of
poet. It is the soul-elevating idea that no man can consider himself
entitled to complain of Fate while in his adversity he still retains the
unwavering love of woman.

From Alfred Tennyson, although in perfect sincerity I regard him as the
noblest poet that ever lived, I have left myself time to cite only a
very brief specimen. I call him, and _think_ him the noblest of poets,
_not_ because the impressions he produces are at _all_ times the most
profound--_not_ because the poetical excitement which he induces is at
_all_ times the most intense--but because it is at all times the most
ethereal--in other words, the most elevating and most pure. No poet is
so little of the earth, earthy. What I am about to read is from his last
long poem, "The Princess:"


    Tears, idle tears, I know not what they mean,
  Tears from the depth of some divine despair
  Rise in the heart, and gather to the eyes,
  In looking on the happy Autumn fields,
  And thinking of the days that are no more.

    Fresh as the first beam glittering on a sail,
  That brings our friends up from the underworld,
  Sad as the last which reddens over one
  That sinks with all we love below the verge;
  So sad, so fresh, the days that are no more.

    Ah, sad and strange as in dark summer dawns
  The earliest pipe of half-awaken'd birds
  To dying ears, when unto dying eyes
  The casement slowly grows a glimmering square;
  So sad, so strange, the days that are no more.

    Dear as remember'd kisses after death,
  And sweet as those by hopeless fancy feign'd
  On lips that are for others; deep as love,
  Deep as first love, and wild with all regret;
  O Death in Life, the days that are no more.


Thus, although in a very cursory and imperfect manner, I have endeavored
to convey to you my conception of the Poetic Principle. It has been my
purpose to suggest that, while this Principle itself is strictly and
simply the Human Aspiration for Supernal Beauty, the manifestation of
the Principle is always found in _an elevating excitement of the soul_,
quite independent of that passion which is the intoxication of the
Heart, or of that truth which is the satisfaction of the Reason. For in
regard to passion, alas! its tendency is to degrade rather than to
elevate the Soul. Love, on the contrary--Love--the true, the divine
Eros--the Uranian as distinguished from the Dionasan Venus--is
unquestionably the purest and truest of all poetical themes. And in
regard to Truth, if, to be sure, through the attainment of a truth we
are led to perceive a harmony where none was apparent before, we
experience at once the true poetical effect; but this effect is
referable to the harmony alone, and not in the least degree to the truth
which merely served to render the harmony manifest.

We shall reach, however, more immediately a distinct conception of what
true Poetry is, by mere reference to a few of the simple elements which
induce in the Poet himself the true poetical effect. He recognizes the
ambrosia which nourishes his soul in the bright orbs that shine in
Heaven, in the volutes of the flower, in the clustering of low
shrubberies, in the waving of the grain-fields, in the slanting of tall
eastern trees, in the blue distance of mountains, in the grouping of
clouds, in the twinkling of half-hidden brooks, in the gleaming of
silver rivers, in the repose of sequestered lakes, in the star-mirroring
depths of lonely wells. He perceives it in the songs of birds, in the
harp of olus, in the sighing of the night-wind, in the repining voice
of the forest, in the surf that complains to the shore, in the fresh
breath of the woods, in the scent of the violet, in the voluptuous
perfume of the hyacinth, in the suggestive odor that comes to him at
eventide from far-distant undiscovered islands, over dim oceans,
illimitable and unexplored. He owns it in all noble thoughts, in all
unworldly motives, in all holy impulses, in all chivalrous, generous,
and self-sacrificing deeds. He feels it in the beauty of woman, in the
grace of her step, in the lustre of her eye, in the melody of her voice,
in her soft laughter, in her sigh, in the harmony of the rustling of her
robes. He deeply feels it in her winning endearments, in her burning
enthusiasms, in her gentle charities, in her meek and devotional
endurance, but above all, ah, far above all, he kneels to it, he
worships it in the faith, in the purity, in the strength, in the
altogether divine majesty of her _love._

Let me conclude by the recitation of yet another brief poem, one very
different in character from any that I have before quoted. It is by
Motherwell, and is called "The Song of the Cavalier." With our modern
and altogether rational ideas of the absurdity and impiety of warfare,
we are not precisely in that frame of mind best adapted to sympathize
with the sentiments, and thus to appreciate the real excellence of the
poem. To do this fully we must identify ourselves in fancy with the soul
of the old cavalier:


  A steed! a steed! of matchless speede!
    A sword of metal keene!
  Al else to noble heartes is drosse--
    Al else on earth is meane.
  The neighynge of the war-horse prowde.
    The rowleing of the drum,
  The clangor of the trumpet lowde--
    Be soundes from heaven that come.
  And oh! the thundering presse of knightes,
    When as their war-cryes welle,
  May tole from heaven an angel bright,
    And rowse a fiend from hell,

  Then mounte! then mounte, brave gallants all,
    And don your helmes amaine,
  Deathe's couriers, Fame and Honor, call
    Us to the field againe.
  No shrewish teares shall fill your eye
    When the sword-hilt's in our hand,--
  Heart-whole we'll part, and no whit sighe
    For the fayrest of the land;
  Let piping swaine, and craven wight,
    Thus weepe and puling crye,
  Our business is like men to fight,
    And hero-like to die!